
--- Page 20 ---
xx
CONTENTS
19 Autoencoders
563
19.1
Deterministic Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
564
19.1.1 Linear autoencoders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
564
19.1.2 Deep autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
565
19.1.3 Sparse autoencoders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
566
19.1.4 Denoising autoencoders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
567
19.1.5 Masked autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
567
19.2
Variational Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
569
19.2.1 Amortized inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
572
19.2.2 The reparameterization trick . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
574
Exercises
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
578
20 Diffusion Models
581
20.1
Forward Encoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
582
20.1.1 Diffusion kernel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
583
20.1.2 Conditional distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
584
20.2
Reverse Decoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
585
20.2.1 Training the decoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
587
20.2.2 Evidence lower bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
588
20.2.3 Rewriting the ELBO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
589
20.2.4 Predicting the noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
591
20.2.5 Generating new samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
592
20.3
Score Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
594
20.3.1 Score loss function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
595
20.3.2 Modiﬁed score loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
596
20.3.3 Noise variance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
597
20.3.4 Stochastic differential equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
598
20.4
Guided Diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
599
20.4.1 Classiﬁer guidance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
600
20.4.2 Classiﬁer-free guidance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
600
Exercises
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
603
Appendix A
Linear Algebra
609
A.1
Matrix Identities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
609
A.2
Traces and Determinants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
610
A.3
Matrix Derivatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
611
A.4
Eigenvectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
612
Appendix B
Calculus of Variations
617
Appendix C
Lagrange Multipliers
621
Bibliography
625
Index
641

--- Page 21 ---
1
The Deep
Learning
Revolution
Machine learning today is one of the most important, and fastest growing, ﬁelds
of technology. Applications of machine learning are becoming ubiquitous, and so-
lutions learned from data are increasingly displacing traditional hand-crafted algo-
rithms. This has not only led to improved performance for existing technologies but
has opened the door to a vast range of new capabilities that would be inconceivable
if new algorithms had to be designed explicitly by hand.
One particular branch of machine learning, known as deep learning, has emerged
as an exceptionally powerful and general-purpose framework for learning from data.
Deep learning is based on computational models called neural networks which were
originally inspired by mechanisms of learning and information processing in the hu-
man brain. The ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence, or AI, seeks to recreate the powerful
capabilities of the brain in machines, and today the terms machine learning and AI
are often used interchangeably. Many of the AI systems in current use represent ap-
1
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
C. M. Bishop, H. Bishop, Deep Learning, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45468-4_1
 
 
 
 

--- Page 22 ---
2
1. THE DEEP LEARNING REVOLUTION
plications of machine learning which are designed to solve very speciﬁc and focused
problems, and while these are extremely useful they fall far short of the tremendous
breadth of capabilities of the human brain. This has led to the introduction of the
term artiﬁcial general intelligence, or AGI, to describe the aspiration of building
machines with this much greater ﬂexibility. After many decades of steady progress,
machine learning has now entered a phase of very rapid development. Recently,
massive deep learning systems called large language models have started to exhibit
Chapter 12
remarkable capabilities that have been described as the ﬁrst indications of artiﬁcial
general intelligence (Bubeck et al., 2023).
1.1. The Impact of Deep Learning
We begin our discussion of machine learning by considering four examples drawn
from diverse ﬁelds to illustrate the huge breadth of applicability of this technology
and to introduce some basic concepts and terminology. What is particularly remark-
able about these and many other examples is that they have all been addressed using
variants of the same fundamental framework of deep learning. This is in sharp con-
trast to conventional approaches in which different applications are tackled using
widely differing and specialist techniques. It should be emphasized that the exam-
ples we have chosen represent only a tiny fraction of the breadth of applicability for
deep neural networks and that almost every domain where computation has a role is
amenable to the transformational impact of deep learning.
1.1.1
Medical diagnosis
Consider ﬁrst the application of machine learning to the problem of diagnosing
skin cancer. Melanoma is the most dangerous kind of skin cancer but is curable
if detected early. Figure 1.1 shows example images of skin lesions, with malig-
nant melanomas on the top row and benign nevi on the bottom row. Distinguishing
between these two classes of image is clearly very challenging, and it would be vir-
tually impossible to write an algorithm by hand that could successfully classify such
images with any reasonable level of accuracy.
This problem has been successfully addressed using deep learning (Esteva et
al., 2017). The solution was created using a large set of lesion images, known as
Figure 1.1
Examples of skin lesions cor-
responding to dangerous ma-
lignant melanomas on the top
row and benign nevi on the bot-
tom row.
It is difﬁcult for the
untrained eye to distinguish be-
tween these two classes.

--- Page 23 ---
1.1. The Impact of Deep Learning
3
a training set, each of which is labelled as either malignant or benign, where the
labels are obtained from a biopsy test that is considered to provide the true class
of the lesion. The training set is used to determine the values of some 25 million
adjustable parameters, known as weights, in a deep neural network. This process of
setting the parameter values from data is known as learning or training. The goal
is for the trained network to predict the correct label for a new lesion just from the
image alone without needing the time-consuming step of taking a biopsy. This is an
example of a supervised learning problem because, for each training example, the
network is told the correct label. It is also an example of a classiﬁcation problem
because each input must be assigned to a discrete set of classes (benign or malignant
in this case). Applications in which the output consists of one or more continuous
variables are called regression problems. An example of a regression problem would
be the prediction of the yield in a chemical manufacturing process in which the inputs
consist of the temperature, the pressure, and the concentrations of reactants.
An interesting aspect of this application is that the number of labelled training
images available, roughly 129,000, is considered relatively small, and so the deep
neural network was ﬁrst trained on a much larger data set of 1.28 million images of
everyday objects (such as dogs, buildings, and mushrooms) and then ﬁne-tuned on
the data set of lesion images. This is an example of transfer learning in which the
network learns the general properties of natural images from the large data set of
everyday objects and is then specialized to the speciﬁc problem of lesion classiﬁca-
tion. Through the use of deep learning, the classiﬁcation of skin lesion images has
reached a level of accuracy that exceeds that of professional dermatologists (Brinker
et al., 2019).
1.1.2
Protein structure
Proteins are sometimes called the building blocks of living organisms. They are
biological molecules that consist of one or more long chains of units called amino
acids, of which there are 22 different types, and the protein is speciﬁed by the se-
quence of amino acids. Once a protein has been synthesized inside a living cell, it
folds into a complex three-dimensional structure whose behaviour and interactions
are strongly determined by its shape. Calculating this 3D structure, given the amino
acid sequence, has been a fundamental open problem in biology for half a century
that had seen relatively little progress until the advent of deep learning.
The 3D structure can be measured experimentally using techniques such as X-
ray crystallography, cryogenic electron microscopy, or nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy. However, this can be extremely time-consuming and for some pro-
teins can prove to be challenging, for example due to the difﬁculty of obtaining a
pure sample or because the structure is dependent on the context. In contrast, the
amino acid sequence of a protein can be determined experimentally at lower cost
and higher throughput. Consequently, there is considerable interest in being able
to predict the 3D structures of proteins directly from their amino acid sequences in
order to better understand biological processes or for practical applications such as
drug discovery. A deep learning model can be trained to take an amino acid se-
quence as input and generate the 3D structure as output, in which the training data

--- Page 24 ---
4
1. THE DEEP LEARNING REVOLUTION
Figure 1.2
Illustration of the 3D shape of a pro-
tein called T1044/6VR4. The green
structure shows the ground truth
as determined by X-ray crystallog-
raphy, whereas the superimposed
blue structure shows the prediction
obtained by a deep learning model
called AlphaFold. [From Jumper et
al. (2021) with permission.]
consist of a set of proteins for which the amino acid sequence and the 3D structure
are both known. Protein structure prediction is therefore another example of super-
vised learning. Once the system is trained it can take a new amino acid sequence as
input and can predict the associated 3D structure (Jumper et al., 2021). Figure 1.2
compares the predicted 3D structure of a protein and the ground truth obtained by
X-ray crystallography.
1.1.3
Image synthesis
In the two applications discussed so far, a neural network learned to transform
an input (a skin image or an amino acid sequence) into an output (a lesion classiﬁca-
tion or a 3D protein structure, respectively). We turn now to an example where the
training data consist simply of a set of sample images and the goal of the trained net-
work is to create new images of the same kind. This is an example of unsupervised
learning because the images are unlabelled, in contrast to the lesion classiﬁcation
and protein structure examples. Figure 1.3 shows examples of synthetic images gen-
erated by a deep neural network trained on a set of images of human faces taken in a
studio against a plain background. Such synthetic images are of exceptionally high
quality and it can be difﬁcult tell them apart from photographs of real people.
This is an example of a generative model because it can generate new output
examples that differ from those used to train the model but which share the same
statistical properties. A variant of this approach allows images to be generated that
depend on an input text string known, as a prompt, so that the image content reﬂects
the semantics of the text input. The term generative AI is used to describe deep learn-
Chapter 10
ing models that generate outputs in the form of images, video, audio, text, candidate
drug molecules, or other modalities.

--- Page 25 ---
1.1. The Impact of Deep Learning
5
Figure 1.3
Synthetic face images generated by a deep neural network trained using unsupervised learning.
[From https://generated.photos.]
1.1.4
Large language models
One of most important advances in machine learning in recent years has been
the development of powerful models for processing natural language and other forms
of sequential data such as source code. A large language model, or LLM, uses deep
learning to build rich internal representations that capture the semantic properties
of language. An important class of large language models, called autoregressive
language models, can generate language as output, and therefore, they are a form of
generative AI. Such models take a sequence of words as the input and for the output,
generate a single word that represents the next word in the sequence. The augmented
sequence, with the new word appended at the end, can then be fed through the model
again to generate the subsequent word, and this process can be repeated to generate
a long sequence of words. Such models can also output a special ‘stop’ word that
signals the end of text generation, thereby allowing them to output text of ﬁnite
length and then halt. At that point, a user could append their own series of words
to the sequence before feeding the complete sequence back through the model to
trigger further word generation. In this way, it is possible for a human to have a
conversation with the neural network.
Such models can be trained on large data sets of text by extracting training pairs
each consisting of a randomly selected sequence of words as input with the known
next word as the target output. This is an example of self-supervised learning in
which a function from inputs to outputs is learned but where the labelled outputs are
obtained automatically from the input training data without needing separate human-

--- Page 26 ---
6
1. THE DEEP LEARNING REVOLUTION
Figure 1.4
Plot of a training data set of N =
10 points, shown as blue circles,
each comprising an observation
of the input variable x along with
the corresponding target variable
t.
The green curve shows the
function sin(2πx) used to gener-
ate the data. Our goal is to pre-
dict the value of t for some new
value of x, without knowledge of
the green curve.
0
1
x
−1
1
t
derived labels. Since large volumes of text are available from multiple sources, this
approach allows for scaling to very large training sets and associated very large neu-
ral networks.
Large language models can exhibit extraordinary capabilities that have been de-
scribed as the ﬁrst indications of emerging artiﬁcial general intelligence (Bubeck et
al., 2023), and we discuss such models at length later in the book. On the next page,
Chapter 12
we give an illustration of language generation, based on a model called GPT-4 (Ope-
nAI, 2023), in response to an input prompt ‘Write a proof of the fact that there are
inﬁnitely many primes; do it in the style of a Shakespeare play through a dialogue
between two parties arguing over the proof.’.
1.2. A Tutorial Example
For the newcomer to the ﬁeld of machine learning, many of the basic concepts and
much of the terminology can be introduced in the context of a simple example in-
volving the ﬁtting of a polynomial to a small synthetic data set (Bishop, 2006). This
is a form of supervised learning problem in which we would like to make a prediction
for a target variable, given the value of an input variable.
1.2.1
Synthetic data
We denote the input variable by x and the target variable by t, and we assume
that both variables take continuous values on the real axis. Suppose that we are
given a training set comprising N observations of x, written x1, . . . , xN, together
with corresponding observations of the values of t, denoted t1, . . . , tN. Our goal
is to predict the value of t for some new value of x. The ability to make accurate
predictions on previously unseen inputs is a key goal in machine learning and is
known as generalization.
We can illustrate this using a synthetic data set generated by sampling from a
sinusoidal function. Figure 1.4 shows a plot of a training set comprising N = 10 data
points in which the input values were generated by choosing values of xn, for n =
1, . . . , N, spaced uniformly in the range [0, 1]. The associated target data values were
obtained by ﬁrst computing the values of the function sin(2πx) for each value of x

--- Page 27 ---
1.2. A Tutorial Example
7
GPT-4: Proof of inﬁnitely many primes
FIRST PARTY:
Thou dost not understand, my friend,
There simply is no upper end
To primes, those numbers indivisible,
No matter if it seems impossible.
SECOND PARTY:
But how dost thou so surely know?
To prove this truth, what canst thou show?
FIRST PARTY:
Consider this, my doubtful peer,
A clever proof that will make clear:
Assume that there’s a final prime,
The largest one we’ll see in time.
Let’s call this number "P" for short,
And then, my friend, we will purport
To build a number "Q" that’s new,
One larger than "P" and prime too.
SECOND PARTY:
But how, my friend, will this be done?
The proof is not yet fairly won.
FIRST PARTY:
It’s simple, friend, just wait and see,
We’ll multiply the primes, that’s key.
All primes from two to "P" combined,
Will make this new "Q" we will find.
But one thing more we must include,
To make the proof more watertight,
We’ll add a one onto the end,
And now the proof is in our sight.
SECOND PARTY:
I see it now, it’s crystal clear,
For "Q" must be a prime, my dear.
It can’t divide by any prime,
All smaller than itself in time.
And since we chose "P" as the last,
This proves that our assumption’s past.
There is no final prime, we see,
The numbers go on endlessly.

--- Page 28 ---
8
1. THE DEEP LEARNING REVOLUTION
and then adding a small level of random noise (governed by a Gaussian distribution)
Section 2.3
to each such point to obtain the corresponding target value tn. By generating data
in this way, we are capturing an important property of many real-world data sets,
namely that they possess an underlying regularity, which we wish to learn, but that
individual observations are corrupted by random noise. This noise might arise from
intrinsically stochastic (i.e., random) processes such as radioactive decay but more
typically is due to there being sources of variability that are themselves unobserved.
In this tutorial example we know the true process that generated the data, namely
the sinusoidal function. In a practical application of machine learning, our goal is to
discover the underlying trends in the data given the ﬁnite training set. Knowing the
process that generated the data, however, allows us to illustrate important concepts
in machine learning.
1.2.2
Linear models
Our goal is to exploit this training set to predict the valuebt of the target variable
for some new value bx of the input variable. As we will see later, this involves im-
plicitly trying to discover the underlying function sin(2πx). This is intrinsically a
difﬁcult problem as we have to generalize from a ﬁnite data set to an entire function.
Furthermore, the observed data is corrupted with noise, and so for a given bx there
is uncertainty as to the appropriate value for bt. Probability theory provides a frame-
Chapter 2
work for expressing such uncertainty in a precise and quantitative manner, whereas
decision theory allows us to exploit this probabilistic representation to make predic-
Chapter 5
tions that are optimal according to appropriate criteria. Learning probabilities from
data lies at the heart of machine learning and will be explored in great detail in this
book.
To start with, however, we will proceed rather informally and consider a simple
approach based on curve ﬁtting. In particular, we will ﬁt the data using a polynomial
function of the form
y(x, w) = w0 + w1x + w2x2 + . . . + wMxM =
M
X
j=0
wjxj
(1.1)
where M is the order of the polynomial, and xj denotes x raised to the power of j.
The polynomial coefﬁcients w0, . . . , wM are collectively denoted by the vector w.
Note that, although the polynomial function y(x, w) is a nonlinear function of x, it
is a linear function of the coefﬁcients w. Functions, such as this polynomial, that are
linear in the unknown parameters have important properties, as well as signiﬁcant
limitations, and are called linear models.
Chapter 4
1.2.3
Error function
The values of the coefﬁcients will be determined by ﬁtting the polynomial to the
training data. This can be done by minimizing an error function that measures the
misﬁt between the function y(x, w), for any given value of w, and the training set
data points. One simple choice of error function, which is widely used, is the sum of

--- Page 29 ---
1.2. A Tutorial Example
9
Figure 1.5
The error function (1.2) cor-
responds to (one half of)
the sum of the squares of
the displacements (shown
by the vertical green arrows)
of each data point from the
function y(x, w).
xn
tn
y(xn, w)
x
t
the squares of the differences between the predictions y(xn, w) for each data point
xn and the corresponding target value tn, given by
E(w) = 1
2
N
X
n=1
{y(xn, w) −tn}2
(1.2)
where the factor of 1/2 is included for later convenience. We will later derive this
error function starting from probability theory. Here we simply note that it is a non-
Section 2.3.4
negative quantity that would be zero if, and only if, the function y(x, w) were to
pass exactly through each training data point. The geometrical interpretation of the
sum-of-squares error function is illustrated in Figure 1.5.
We can solve the curve ﬁtting problem by choosing the value of w for which
E(w) is as small as possible. Because the error function is a quadratic function of
the coefﬁcients w, its derivatives with respect to the coefﬁcients will be linear in the
elements of w, and so the minimization of the error function has a unique solution,
denoted by w⋆, which can be found in closed form. The resulting polynomial is
Exercise 4.1
given by the function y(x, w⋆).
1.2.4
Model complexity
There remains the problem of choosing the order M of the polynomial, and as
we will see this will turn out to be an example of an important concept called model
comparison or model selection. In Figure 1.6, we show four examples of the results
of ﬁtting polynomials having orders M = 0, 1, 3, and 9 to the data set shown in
Figure 1.4.
Notice that the constant (M = 0) and ﬁrst-order (M = 1) polynomials give poor
ﬁts to the data and consequently poor representations of the function sin(2πx). The
third-order (M = 3) polynomial seems to give the best ﬁt to the function sin(2πx) of
the examples shown in Figure 1.6. When we go to a much higher order polynomial
(M = 9), we obtain an excellent ﬁt to the training data. In fact, the polynomial

--- Page 30 ---
10
1. THE DEEP LEARNING REVOLUTION
0
1
x
−1
1
t
M = 0
0
1
x
−1
1
t
M = 1
0
1
x
−1
1
t
M = 3
0
1
x
−1
1
t
M = 9
Figure 1.6
Plots of polynomials having various orders M, shown as red curves, ﬁtted to the data set shown in
Figure 1.4 by minimizing the error function (1.2).
passes exactly through each data point and E(w⋆) = 0. However, the ﬁtted curve
oscillates wildly and gives a very poor representation of the function sin(2πx). This
latter behaviour is known as over-ﬁtting.
Our goal is to achieve good generalization by making accurate predictions for
new data. We can obtain some quantitative insight into the dependence of the gener-
alization performance on M by considering a separate set of data known as a test set,
comprising 100 data points generated using the same procedure as used to generate
the training set points. For each value of M, we can evaluate the residual value of
E(w⋆) given by (1.2) for the training data, and we can also evaluate E(w⋆) for the
test data set. Instead of evaluating the error function E(w), it is sometimes more
convenient to use the root-mean-square (RMS) error deﬁned by
ERMS =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
n=1
{y(xn, w) −tn}2
(1.3)
in which the division by N allows us to compare different sizes of data sets on an
equal footing, and the square root ensures that ERMS is measured on the same scale
(and in the same units) as the target variable t. Graphs of the training-set and test-set

--- Page 31 ---
1.2. A Tutorial Example
11
Figure 1.7
Graphs
of
the
root-mean-
square error, deﬁned by (1.3), evaluated on
the training set, and on an independent test
set, for various values of M.
0
3
6
9
M
0
1
ERMS
Training
Test
RMS errors are shown, for various values of M, in Figure 1.7. The test set error
is a measure of how well we are doing in predicting the values of t for new data
observations of x. Note from Figure 1.7 that small values of M give relatively large
values of the test set error, and this can be attributed to the fact that the corresponding
polynomials are rather inﬂexible and are incapable of capturing the oscillations in
the function sin(2πx). Values of M in the range 3 ⩽M ⩽8 give small values
for the test set error, and these also give reasonable representations of the generating
function sin(2πx), as can be seen for M = 3 in Figure 1.6.
For M = 9, the training set error goes to zero, as we might expect because
this polynomial contains 10 degrees of freedom corresponding to the 10 coefﬁcients
w0, . . . , w9, and so can be tuned exactly to the 10 data points in the training set.
However, the test set error has become very large and, as we saw in Figure 1.6, the
corresponding function y(x, w⋆) exhibits wild oscillations.
This may seem paradoxical because a polynomial of a given order contains all
lower-order polynomials as special cases. The M = 9 polynomial is therefore ca-
pable of generating results at least as good as the M = 3 polynomial. Furthermore,
we might suppose that the best predictor of new data would be the function sin(2πx)
from which the data was generated (and we will see later that this is indeed the case).
We know that a power series expansion of the function sin(2πx) contains terms of all
orders, so we might expect that results should improve monotonically as we increase
M.
We can gain some insight into the problem by examining the values of the co-
efﬁcients w⋆obtained from polynomials of various orders, as shown in Table 1.1.
We see that, as M increases, the magnitude of the coefﬁcients typically gets larger.
In particular for the M = 9 polynomial, the coefﬁcients have become ﬁnely tuned
to the data. They have large positive and negative values so that the corresponding
polynomial function matches each of the data points exactly, but between data points
(particularly near the ends of the range) the function exhibits the large oscillations
observed in Figure 1.6. Intuitively, what is happening is that the more ﬂexible poly-
nomials with larger values of M are increasingly tuned to the random noise on the
target values.
Further insight into this phenomenon can be gained by examining the behaviour
of the learned model as the size of the data set is varied, as shown in Figure 1.8. We
see that, for a given model complexity, the over-ﬁtting problem become less severe

--- Page 32 ---
12
1. THE DEEP LEARNING REVOLUTION
0
1
x
−1
1
t
N = 15
0
1
x
−1
1
t
N = 100
Figure 1.8
Plots of the solutions obtained by minimizing the sum-of-squares error function (1.2) using the
M = 9 polynomial for N = 15 data points (left plot) and N = 100 data points (right plot). We see that increasing
the size of the data set reduces the over-ﬁtting problem.
as the size of the data set increases. Another way to say this is that with a larger
data set, we can afford to ﬁt a more complex (in other words more ﬂexible) model
to the data. One rough heuristic that is sometimes advocated in classical statistics
is that the number of data points should be no less than some multiple (say 5 or
10) of the number of learnable parameters in the model. However, when we discuss
deep learning later in this book, we will see that excellent results can be obtained
using models that have signiﬁcantly more parameters than the number of training
data points.
Section 9.3.2
1.2.5
Regularization
There is something rather unsatisfying about having to limit the number of pa-
rameters in a model according to the size of the available training set. It would seem
more reasonable to choose the complexity of the model according to the complexity
of the problem being solved. One technique that is often used to control the over-
ﬁtting phenomenon, as an alternative to limiting the number of parameters, is that
of regularization, which involves adding a penalty term to the error function (1.2) to
discourage the coefﬁcients from having large magnitudes. The simplest such penalty
Table 1.1
Table of the coefﬁcients w⋆
for polynomials of various or-
der.
Observe how the typ-
ical magnitude of the coefﬁ-
cients increases dramatically
as the order of the polynomial
increases.
M = 0
M = 1
M = 3
M = 9
w⋆
0
0.11
0.90
0.12
0.26
w⋆
1
−1.58
11.20
−66.13
w⋆
2
−33.67
1, 665.69
w⋆
3
22.43
−15, 566.61
w⋆
4
76, 321.23
w⋆
5
−217, 389.15
w⋆
6
370, 626.48
w⋆
7
−372, 051.47
w⋆
8
202, 540.70
w⋆
9
−46, 080.94

--- Page 33 ---
1.2. A Tutorial Example
13
0
1
x
−1
1
t
ln λ = −18
0
1
x
−1
1
t
ln λ = 0
Figure 1.9
Plots of M = 9 polynomials ﬁtted to the data set shown in Figure 1.4 using the regularized error
function (1.4) for two values of the regularization parameter λ corresponding to ln λ = −18 and ln λ = 0. The
case of no regularizer, i.e., λ = 0, corresponding to ln λ = −∞, is shown at the bottom right of Figure 1.6.
term takes the form of the sum of the squares of all of the coefﬁcients, leading to a
modiﬁed error function of the form
eE(w) = 1
2
N
X
n=1
{y(xn, w) −tn}2 + λ
2 ∥w∥2
(1.4)
where ∥w∥2 ≡wTw = w2
0 + w2
1 + . . . + w2
M, and the coefﬁcient λ governs the rel-
ative importance of the regularization term compared with the sum-of-squares error
term. Note that often the coefﬁcient w0 is omitted from the regularizer because its
inclusion causes the results to depend on the choice of origin for the target variable
(Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman, 2009), or it may be included but with its own
regularization coefﬁcient. Again, the error function in (1.4) can be minimized ex-
Section 9.2.1
actly in closed form. Techniques such as this are known in the statistics literature as
Exercise 4.2
shrinkage methods because they reduce the value of the coefﬁcients. In the context
of neural networks, this approach is known as weight decay because the parameters
in a neural network are called weights and this regularizer encourages them to decay
towards zero.
Figure 1.9 shows the results of ﬁtting the polynomial of order M = 9 to the
same data set as before but now using the regularized error function given by (1.4).
We see that, for a value of ln λ = −18, the over-ﬁtting has been suppressed and we
now obtain a much closer representation of the underlying function sin(2πx). If,
however, we use too large a value for λ then we again obtain a poor ﬁt, as shown in
Figure 1.9 for ln λ = 0. The corresponding coefﬁcients from the ﬁtted polynomials
are given in Table 1.2, showing that regularization has the desired effect of reducing
the magnitude of the coefﬁcients.
The impact of the regularization term on the generalization error can be seen by
plotting the value of the RMS error (1.3) for both training and test sets against ln λ,
as shown in Figure 1.10. We see that λ now controls the effective complexity of the
model and hence determines the degree of over-ﬁtting.

--- Page 34 ---
14
1. THE DEEP LEARNING REVOLUTION
Figure 1.10
Graph
of
the
root-mean-
square error (1.3) versus ln λ for the M = 9
polynomial.
−30
-20
-10
-0
M
0
0.5
ERMS
Training
Test
1.2.6
Model selection
The quantity λ is an example of a hyperparameter whose values are ﬁxed during
the minimization of the error function to determine the model parameters w. We
cannot simply determine the value of λ by minimizing the error function jointly with
respect to w and λ since this will lead to λ →0 and an over-ﬁtted model with small
or zero training error. Similarly, the order M of the polynomial is a hyperparameter
of the model, and simply optimizing the training set error with respect to M will
lead to large values of M and associated over-ﬁtting. We therefore need to ﬁnd a
way to determine suitable values for hyperparameters. The results above suggest a
simple way of achieving this, namely by taking the available data and partitioning it
into a training set, used to determine the coefﬁcients w, and a separate validation set,
also called a hold-out set or a development set. We then select the model having the
lowest error on the validation set. If the model design is iterated many times using a
data set of limited size, then some over-ﬁtting to the validation data can occur, and
so it may be necessary to keep aside a third test set on which the performance of the
selected model can ﬁnally be evaluated.
For some applications, the supply of data for training and testing will be limited.
To build a good model, we should use as much of the available data as possible for
training. However, if the validation set is too small, it will give a relatively noisy
estimate of predictive performance. One solution to this dilemma is to use cross-
Table 1.2
Table of the coefﬁcients w⋆for
M = 9 polynomials with various
values for the regularization param-
eter λ. Note that ln λ = −∞cor-
responds to a model with no regu-
larization, i.e., to the graph at the
bottom right in Figure 1.6. We see
that, as the value of λ increases,
the magnitude of a typical coefﬁ-
cient gets smaller.
ln λ = −∞
ln λ = −18
ln λ = 0
w⋆
0
0.26
0.26
0.11
w⋆
1
−66.13
0.64
−0.07
w⋆
2
1, 665.69
43.68
−0.09
w⋆
3
−15, 566.61
−144.00
−0.07
w⋆
4
76, 321.23
57.90
−0.05
w⋆
5
−217, 389.15
117.36
−0.04
w⋆
6
370, 626.48
9.87
−0.02
w⋆
7
−372, 051.47
−90.02
−0.01
w⋆
8
202, 540.70
−70.90
−0.01
w⋆
9
−46, 080.94
75.26
0.00

--- Page 35 ---
1.2. A Tutorial Example
15
Figure 1.11
The technique of S-fold cross-validation, illus-
trated here for the case of S = 4, involves tak-
ing the available data and partitioning it into S
groups of equal size. Then S −1 of the groups
are used to train a set of models that are then
evaluated on the remaining group. This proce-
dure is then repeated for all S possible choices
for the held-out group, indicated here by the
red blocks, and the performance scores from
the S runs are then averaged.
run 1
run 2
run 3
run 4
validation, which is illustrated in Figure 1.11. This allows a proportion (S −1)/S of
the available data to be used for training while making use of all of the data to assess
performance. When data is particularly scarce, it may be appropriate to consider the
case S = N, where N is the total number of data points, which gives the leave-one-
out technique.
The main drawback of cross-validation is that the number of training runs that
must be performed is increased by a factor of S, and this can prove problematic for
models in which the training is itself computationally expensive. A further problem
with techniques such as cross-validation that use separate data to assess performance
is that we might have multiple complexity hyperparameters for a single model (for
instance, there might be several regularization hyperparameters). Exploring combi-
nations of settings for such hyperparameters could, in the worst case, require a num-
ber of training runs that is exponential in the number of hyperparameters. The state
of the art in modern machine learning involves extremely large models, trained on
commensurately large data sets. Consequently, there is limited scope for exploration
of hyperparameter settings, and heavy reliance is placed on experience obtained with
smaller models and on heuristics.
This simple example of ﬁtting a polynomial to a synthetic data set generated
from a sinusoidal function has illustrated many key ideas from machine learning,
and we will make further use of this example in future chapters. However, real-
world applications of machine learning differ in several important respects. The size
of the data sets used for training can be many orders of magnitude larger, and there
will generally be many more input variables, perhaps numbering in the millions for
image analysis, for example, as well as multiple output variables. The learnable
function that relates outputs to inputs is governed by a class of models known as
neural networks, and these may have a large number of parameters perhaps num-
bering in the hundreds of billions, and the error function will be a highly nonlinear
function of those parameters. The error function can no longer be minimized through
a closed-form solution and instead must be minimized through iterative optimization
techniques based on evaluation of the derivatives of the error function with respect
to the parameters, all of which may require specialist computational hardware and
incur substantial computational cost.

--- Page 36 ---
16
1. THE DEEP LEARNING REVOLUTION
Figure 1.12
Schematic
illustration
showing two neurons from the human
brain.
These electrically active cells
communicate through junctions called
synapses whose strengths change as
the network learns.
1.3. A Brief History of Machine Learning
Machine learning has a long and rich history, including the pursuit of multiple al-
ternative approaches. Here we focus on the evolution of machine learning methods
based on neural networks as these represent the foundation of deep learning and
have proven to be the most effective approach to machine learning for real-world
applications.
Neural network models were originally inspired by studies of information pro-
cessing in the brains of humans and other mammals. The basic processing units in
the brain are electrically active cells called neurons, as illustrated in Figure 1.12.
When a neuron ‘ﬁres’, it sends an electrical impulse down the axon where it reaches
junctions, called synapses, which form connections with other neurons. Chemical
signals called neurotransmitters are released at the synapses, and these can stimu-
late, or inhibit, the ﬁring of subsequent neurons.
A human brain contains around 90 billion neurons in total, each of which has on
average several thousand synapses with other neurons, creating a complex network
having a total of around 100 trillion (1014) synapses. If a particular neuron receives
sufﬁcient stimulation from the ﬁring of other neurons then it too can be induced to
ﬁre. However, some synapses have a negative, or inhibitory, effect whereby the ﬁring
of the input neuron makes it less likely that the output neuron will ﬁre. The extent to
which one neuron can cause another to ﬁre depends on the strength of the synapse,
and it is changes in these strengths that represents a key mechanism whereby the
brain can store information and learn from experience.
These properties of neurons have been captured in very simple mathematical
models, known as artiﬁcial neural networks, which then form the basis for compu-
tational approaches to learning (McCulloch and Pitts, 1943). Many of these models
describe the properties of a single neuron by forming a linear combination of the
outputs of other neurons, which is then transformed using a nonlinear function. This

--- Page 37 ---
1.3. A Brief History of Machine Learning
17
Figure 1.13
A simple neural network diagram representing the trans-
formations (1.5) and (1.6) describing a single neuron. The
polynomial function (1.1) can be seen as a special case of
this model.
xM
...
x2
x1
y
wM
w2
w1
can be expressed mathematically in the form
a =
M
X
i=1
wixi
(1.5)
y = f(a)
(1.6)
where x1, . . . , xM represent M inputs corresponding to the activities of other neu-
rons that send connections to this neuron, and w1, . . . , wM are continuous variables,
called weights, which represent the strengths of the associated synapses. The quan-
tity a is called the pre-activation, the nonlinear function f(·) is called the activation
function, and the output y is called the activation. We can see that the polynomial
(1.1) can be viewed as a speciﬁc instance of this representation in which the inputs
xi are given by powers of a single variable x, and the function f(·) is just the identity
f(a) = a. The simple mathematical formulation given by (1.5) and (1.6) has formed
the basis of neural network models from the 1960s up to the present day, and can be
represented in diagram form as shown in Figure 1.13.
1.3.1
Single-layer networks
The history of artiﬁcial neural networks can broadly be divided into three distinct
phases according to the level of sophistication of the networks as measured by the
number of ‘layers’ of processing. A simple neural model described by (1.5) and (1.6)
can be viewed as having a single layer of processing corresponding to the single layer
of connections in Figure 1.13. One of the most important such models in the history
of neural computing is the perceptron (Rosenblatt, 1962) in which the activation
function f(·) is a step function of the form
f(a) =
(
0,
if a ⩽0,
1,
if a > 0 .
(1.7)
This can be viewed as a simpliﬁed model of neural ﬁring in which a neuron ﬁres if,
and only if, the total weighted input exceeds a threshold of 0. The perceptron was
pioneered by Rosenblatt (1962), who developed a speciﬁc training algorithm that
has the interesting property that if there exists a set of weight values for which the
perceptron can achieve perfect classiﬁcation of its training data then the algorithm
is guaranteed to ﬁnd the solution in a ﬁnite number of steps (Bishop, 2006). As
well as a learning algorithm, the perceptron also had a dedicated analogue hardware

--- Page 38 ---
18
1. THE DEEP LEARNING REVOLUTION
Figure 1.14
Illustration of the Mark 1 perceptron hardware. The photograph on the left shows how the inputs
were obtained using a simple camera system in which an input scene, in this case a printed character, was
illuminated by powerful lights, and an image focused onto a 20 × 20 array of cadmium sulphide photocells,
giving a primitive 400-pixel image. The perceptron also had a patch board, shown in the middle photograph,
which allowed different conﬁgurations of input features to be tried. Often these were wired up at random to
demonstrate the ability of the perceptron to learn without the need for precise wiring, in contrast to a modern
digital computer. The photograph on the right shows one of the racks of learnable weights. Each weight was
implemented using a rotary variable resistor, also called a potentiometer, driven by an electric motor thereby
allowing the value of the weight to be adjusted automatically by the learning algorithm.
implementation, as shown in Figure 1.14. A typical perceptron conﬁguration had
multiple layers of processing, but only one of those layers was learnable from data,
and so the perceptron is considered to be a ‘single-layer’ neural network.
At ﬁrst, the ability of perceptrons to learn from data in a brain-like way was con-
sidered remarkable. However, it became apparent that the model also has major lim-
itations. The properties of perceptrons were analysed by Minsky and Papert (1969),
who gave formal proofs of the limited capabilities of single-layer networks. Unfortu-
nately, they also speculated that similar limitations would extend to networks having
multiple layers of learnable parameters. Although this latter conjecture proved to
be wildly incorrect, the effect was to dampen enthusiasm for neural network mod-
els, and this contributed to the lack of interest, and funding, for neural networks
during the 1970s and early 1980s. Furthermore, researchers were unable to explore
the properties of multilayered networks due to the lack of an effective algorithm
for training them, since techniques such as the perceptron algorithm were speciﬁc
to single-layer models. Note that although perceptrons have long disappeared from
practical machine learning, the name lives on because a modern neural network is
also sometimes called a multilayer perceptron or MLP.
1.3.2
Backpropagation
The solution to the problem of training neural networks having more than one
layer of learnable parameters came from the use of differential calculus and the appli-
cation of gradient-based optimization methods. An important change was to replace
the step function (1.7) with continuous differentiable activation functions having a
non-zero gradient. Another key modiﬁcation was to introduce differentiable error
functions that deﬁne how well a given choice of parameter values predicts the target
variables in the training set. We saw an example of such an error function when we

--- Page 39 ---
1.3. A Brief History of Machine Learning
19
Figure 1.15
A neural network having two lay-
ers of parameters in which arrows
denote the direction of information
ﬂow through the network. Each of
the hidden units and each of the
output units computes a function of
the form given by (1.5) and (1.6) in
which the activation function f(·) is
differentiable.
inputs
...
hidden units
...
outputs
...
used the sum-of-squares error function (1.2) to ﬁt polynomials.
Section 1.2.3
With these changes, we now have an error function whose derivatives with re-
spect to each of the parameters in the network can be evaluated. We can now consider
networks having more than one layer of parameters. Figure 1.15 shows a simple net-
work with two processing layers. Nodes in the middle layer called hidden units
because their values do not appear in the training set, which only provides values
for inputs and outputs. Each of the hidden units and each of the output units in
Figure 1.15 computes a function of the form given by (1.5) and (1.6). For a given
set of input values, the states of all of the hidden and output units can be evaluated
by repeated application of (1.5) and (1.6) in which information is ﬂowing forward
through the network in the direction of the arrows. For this reason, such models are
sometimes also called feed-forward neural networks.
To train such a network the parameters are ﬁrst initialized using a random num-
ber generator and are then iteratively updated using gradient-based optimization
techniques. This involves evaluating the derivatives of the error function, which
can be done efﬁciently in a process known as error backpropagation. In backpropa-
Chapter 8
gation, information ﬂows backwards through the network from the outputs towards
the inputs (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams, 1986). There exist many different op-
timization algorithms that make use of gradients of the function to be optimized, but
the one that is most prevalent in machine learning is also the simplest and is known
as stochastic gradient descent.
Chapter 7
The ability to train neural networks having multiple layers of weights was a
breakthrough that led to a resurgence of interest in the ﬁeld starting around the mid-
1980s. This was also a period in which the ﬁeld moved beyond a focus on neurobio-
logical inspiration and developed a more rigorous and principled foundation (Bishop,
1995b). In particular, it was recognized that probability theory, and ideas from the
ﬁeld of statistics, play a central role in neural networks and machine learning. One
key insight is that learning from data involves background assumptions, sometimes
called prior knowledge or inductive biases. These might be incorporated explicitly,
for example by designing the structure of a neural network such that the classiﬁca-
tion of a skin lesion does not depend on the location of the lesion within the image,
or they might take the form of implicit assumptions that arise from the mathematical

--- Page 40 ---
20
1. THE DEEP LEARNING REVOLUTION
form of the model or the way it is trained.
The development of backpropagation and gradient-based optimization dramati-
cally increased the capability of neural networks to solve practical problems. How-
ever, it was also observed that in networks with many layers, it was only weights in
the ﬁnal two layers that would learn useful values. With a few exceptions, notably
models used for image analysis known as convolutional neural networks (LeCun
Chapter 10
et al., 1998), there were very few successful applications of networks having more
than two layers. Again, this constrained the complexity of the problems that could
be addressed effectively with these kinds of network. To achieve reasonable perfor-
mance on many applications, it was necessary to use hand-crafted pre-processing to
transform the input variables into some new space where, it was hoped, the machine
learning problem would be easier to solve. This pre-processing stage is sometimes
also called feature extraction. Although this approach was sometimes effective, it
would clearly be much better if features could be learned from the data rather than
being hand-crafted.
By the start of the new millennium, the available neural network methods were
once again reaching the limits of their capability. Researchers began to explore a
raft of alternatives to neural networks, such as kernel methods, support vector ma-
chines, Gaussian processes, and many others. Neural networks fell into disfavour
once again, although a core of enthusiastic researchers continued to pursue the goal
of a truly effective approach to training networks with many layers.
1.3.3
Deep networks
The third, and current, phase in the development of neural networks began dur-
ing the second decade of the 21st century. A series of developments allowed neural
networks with many layers of weights to be trained effectively, thereby removing
previous limitations on the capabilities of these techniques. Networks with many lay-
ers of weights are called deep neural networks and the sub-ﬁeld of machine learning
that focuses on such networks is called deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton,
2015).
One important theme in the origins of deep learning was a signiﬁcant increase
in the scale of neural networks, measured in terms of the number of parameters. Al-
though networks with a few hundred or a few thousand parameters were common in
the 1980s, this steadily rose to the millions, and then billions, whereas current state-
of-the-art models can have in the region of one trillion (1012) parameters. Networks
with many parameters require commensurately large data sets so that the training
signals can produced good values for those parameters. The combination of massive
models and massive data sets in turn requires computation on a massive scale when
training the model. Specialist processors called graphics processing units, or GPUs,
which had been developed for very fast rendering of graphical data for applications
such as video games, proved to be well suited to the training of neural networks be-
cause the functions computed by the units in one layer of a network can be evaluated
in parallel, and this maps well onto the massive parallelism of GPUs (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton, 2012). Today, training for the largest models is performed on
large arrays of thousands of GPUs linked by specialist high-speed interconnections.

--- Page 41 ---
1.3. A Brief History of Machine Learning
21
Figure 1.16
Plot of the number of compute cycles, measured in petaﬂop/s-days, needed to train a state-of-the-
art neural network as a function of date, showing two distinct phases of exponential growth. [From OpenAI with
permission.]
Figure 1.16 illustrates how the number of compute cycles needed to train a state-
of-the-art neural network has grown over the years, showing two distinct phases of
growth. The vertical axis has an exponential scale and has units of petaﬂop/s-days,
where a petaﬂop represents 1015 (a thousand trillion) ﬂoating point operations, and a
petaﬂop/s is one petaﬂop per second. One petaﬂop/s-day represents computation at
the rate of a petaﬂop/s for a period of 24 hours, which is roughly 1020 ﬂoating point
operations, and therefore, the top line of the graph represents an impressive 1024
ﬂoating point operations. A straight line on the graph represents exponential growth,
and we see that from the era of the perceptron up to around 2012, the doubling time
was around 2 years, which is consistent with the general growth of computing power
as a consequence of Moore’s law. From 2012 onward, which marks the era of deep
learning, we again see exponential growth but the doubling time is now 3.4 months
corresponding to a factor of 10 increase in compute power every year!
It is often found that improvements in performance due to innovations in the
architecture or incorporation of more sophisticated forms of inductive bias are soon
