
--- Page 42 ---
22
1. THE DEEP LEARNING REVOLUTION
superseded simply by scaling up the quantity of training data, along with commen-
surate scaling of the model size and associated compute power used for training
(Sutton, 2019). Not only can large models have superior performance on a speciﬁc
task but they may be capable of solving a broader range of different problems with
the same trained neural network. Large language models are a notable example as a
single network not only has an extraordinary breadth of capability but is even able to
outperform specialist networks designed to solve speciﬁc problems.
Section 12.3.5
We have seen that depth plays an important role in allowing neural networks to
achieve high performance. One way to view the role of the hidden layers in a deep
neural network is that of representation learning (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent,
2012) in which the network learns to transform input data into a new representation
that is semantically meaningful thereby creating a much easier problem for the ﬁnal
layer or layers to solve. Such internal representations can be repurposed to allow for
the solution of related problems through transfer learning, as we saw for skin lesion
classiﬁcation. It is interesting to note that neural networks used to process images
may learn internal representations that are remarkably like those observed in the
mammalian visual cortex. Large neural networks that can be adapted or ﬁne-tuned
Section 10.3
to a range of downstream tasks are called foundation models, and can take advan-
tage of large, heterogeneous data sets to create models having broad applicability
(Bommasani et al., 2021).
In addition to scaling, there were other developments that helped in the suc-
cess of deep learning. For example, in simple neural networks, the training signals
become weaker as they are backpropagated through successive layers of a deep net-
work. One technique for addressing this is the introduction of residual connections
Section 9.5
(He et al., 2015a) that facilitate the training of networks having hundreds of layers.
Another key development was the introduction of automatic differentiation methods
in which the code that performs backpropagation to evaluate error function gradients
is generated automatically from the code used to specify the forward propagation.
This allows researchers to experiment rapidly with different architectures for a neural
network and to combine different architectural elements in multiple ways very easily
since only the relatively simple forward propagation functions need to be coded ex-
plicitly. Also, much of the research in machine learning has been conducted through
open source, allowing researchers to build on the work of others, thereby further
accelerating the rate of progress in the ﬁeld.

--- Page 43 ---
2
Probabilities
In almost every application of machine learning we have to deal with uncertainty. For
example, a system that classiﬁes images of skin lesions as benign or malignant can
never in practice achieve perfect accuracy. We can distinguish between two kinds of
uncertainty. The ﬁrst is epistemic uncertainty (derived from the Greek word episteme
meaning knowledge), sometimes called systematic uncertainty. It arises because we
only get to see data sets of ﬁnite size. As we observe more data, for instance more
examples of benign and malignant skin lesion images, we are better able to predict
the class of a new example. However, even with an inﬁnitely large data set, we would
still not be able to achieve perfect accuracy due to the second kind of uncertainty
known as aleatoric uncertainty, also called intrinsic or stochastic uncertainty, or
sometimes simply called noise. Generally speaking, the noise arises because we are
able to observe only partial information about the world, and therefore, one way to
reduce this source of uncertainty is to gather different kinds of data. This is illustrated
23
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
C. M. Bishop, H. Bishop, Deep Learning, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45468-4_2
 
 
 
 

--- Page 44 ---
24
2. PROBABILITIES
x1
x2
y
(a)
x1
y
(b)
x1
(c)
Figure 2.1
An extension of the simple sine curve regression problem to two dimensions. (a) A plot of the
function y(x1, x2) = sin(2πx1) sin(2πx2). Data is generated by selecting values for x1 and x2, computing the
corresponding value of y(x1, x2), and then adding Gaussian noise. (b) Plot of 100 data points in which x2 is
unobserved showing high levels of noise. (c) Plot of 100 data points in which x2 is ﬁxed to the value x2 = π
2 ,
simulating the effect of being able to measure x2 as well as x1, showing much lower levels of noise.
using an extension of the sine curve example to two dimensions in Figure 2.1.
Section 1.2
As a practical example of this, a biopsy sample of the skin lesion is much more
informative than the image alone and might greatly improve the accuracy with which
we can determine if a new lesion is malignant. Given both the image and the biopsy
data, the intrinsic uncertainty might be very small, and by collecting a large training
data set, we may be able to reduce the systematic uncertainty to a low level and
thereby make predictions of the class of the lesion with high accuracy.
Both kinds of uncertainty can be handled using the framework of probability
theory, which provides a consistent paradigm for the quantiﬁcation and manipula-
tion of uncertainty and therefore forms one of the central foundations for machine
learning. We will see that probabilities are governed by two simple formulae known
Section 2.1
as the sum rule and the product rule. When coupled with decision theory, these rules
Section 5.2
allow us, at least in principle, to make optimal predictions given all the information
available to us, even though that information may be incomplete or ambiguous.
The concept of probability is often introduced in terms of frequencies of repeat-
able events. Consider, for example, the bent coin shown in Figure 2.2, and suppose
that the shape of the coin is such that if it is ﬂipped a large number of times, it lands
concave side up 60% of the time, and therefore lands convex side up 40% of the
time. We say that the probability of landing concave side up is 60% or 0.6. Strictly,
the probability is deﬁned in the limit of an inﬁnite number of ‘trials’ or coin ﬂips
in this case. Because the coin must land either concave side up or convex side up,
these probabilities add to 100% or 1.0. This deﬁnition of probability in terms of the
frequency of repeatable events is the basis for the frequentist view of statistics.
Now suppose that, although we know that the probability that the coin will land
concave side up is 0.6, we are not allowed to look at the coin itself and we do not

--- Page 45 ---
2.1. The Rules of Probability
25
Figure 2.2
Probability can be viewed ei-
ther as a frequency associated
with a repeatable event or as
a quantiﬁcation of uncertainty.
A bent coin can be used to il-
lustrate the difference, as dis-
cussed in the text.
60%
40%
know which side is heads and which is tails. If asked to take a bet on whether the coin
will land heads or tails when ﬂipped, then symmetry suggests that our bet should be
based on the assumption that the probability of seeing heads is 0.5, and indeed a
more careful analysis shows that, in the absence of any additional information, this
is indeed the rational choice. Here we are using probabilities in a more general sense
than simply the frequency of events. Whether the convex side of the coin is heads or
tails is not itself a repeatable event, it is simply unknown. The use of probability as a
quantiﬁcation of uncertainty is the Bayesian perspective and is more general in that
Section 2.6
it includes frequentist probability as a special case. We can learn about which side
of the coin is heads if we are given results from a sequence of coin ﬂips by making
use of Bayesian reasoning. The more results we observe, the lower our uncertainty
Exercise 2.40
as to which side of the coin is which.
Having introduced the concept of probability informally, we turn now to a more
detailed exploration of probabilities and discuss how to use them quantitatively. Con-
cepts developed in the remainder of this chapter will form a core foundation for many
of the topics discussed throughout the book.
2.1. The Rules of Probability
In this section we will derive two simple rules that govern the behaviour of proba-
bilities. However, in spite of their apparent simplicity, these rules will prove to be
very powerful and widely applicable. We will motivate the rules of probability by
ﬁrst introducing a simple example.
2.1.1
A medical screening example
Consider the problem of screening a population in order to provide early detec-
tion of cancer, and let us suppose that 1% of the population actually have cancer.
Ideally our test for cancer would give a positive result for anyone who has cancer
and a negative result for anyone who does not. However, tests are not perfect, so
we will suppose that when the test is given to people who are free of cancer, 3% of
them will test positive. These are known as false positives. Similarly, when the test
is given to people who do have cancer, 10% of them will test negative. These are
called false negatives. The various error rates are illustrated in Figure 2.3.
Given this information, we might ask the following questions: (1) ‘If we screen
the population, what is the probability that someone will test positive?’, (2) ‘If some-

--- Page 46 ---
26
2. PROBABILITIES
Figure 2.3
Illustration of the accuracy of
a cancer test.
Out of ev-
ery hundred people taking the
test who do not have cancer,
shown on the left, on average
three will test positive.
For
those who have cancer, shown
on the right, out of every hun-
dred people taking the test, on
average 90 will test positive.
No Cancer
Cancer
one receives a positive test result, what is the probability that they actually have can-
cer?’. We could answer such questions by working through the cancer screening case
in detail. Instead, however, we will pause our discussion of this speciﬁc example and
ﬁrst derive the general rules of probability, known as the sum rule of probability and
the product rule. We will then illustrate the use of these rules by answering our two
questions.
2.1.2
The sum and product rules
To derive the rules of probability, consider the slightly more general example
shown in Figure 2.4 involving two variables X and Y . In our cancer example, X
could represent the presence or absence of cancer, and Y could be a variable de-
noting the outcome of the test. Because the values of these variables can vary from
one person to another in a way that is generally unknown, they are called random
variables or stochastic variables. We will suppose that X can take any of the values
xi where i = 1, . . . , L and that Y can take the values yj where j = 1, . . . , M. Con-
sider a total of N trials in which we sample both of the variables X and Y , and let
the number of such trials in which X = xi and Y = yj be nij. Also, let the number
of trials in which X takes the value xi (irrespective of the value that Y takes) be
denoted by ci, and similarly let the number of trials in which Y takes the value yj be
denoted by rj.
The probability that X will take the value xi and Y will take the value yj is
written p(X = xi, Y = yj) and is called the joint probability of X = xi and
Y = yj. It is given by the number of points falling in the cell i,j as a fraction of the
total number of points, and hence
p(X = xi, Y = yj) = nij
N .
(2.1)
Here we are implicitly considering the limit N →∞. Similarly, the probability that
X takes the value xi irrespective of the value of Y is written as p(X = xi) and is

--- Page 47 ---
2.1. The Rules of Probability
27
Figure 2.4
We can derive the sum and product rules
of probability by considering a random vari-
able X, which takes the values {xi} where
i = 1, . . . , L, and a second random variable
Y , which takes the values {yj} where j =
1, . . . , M. In this illustration, we have L = 5
and M = 3. If we consider the total number
N of instances of these variables, then we de-
note the number of instances where X = xi
and Y = yj by nij, which is the number of in-
stances in the corresponding cell of the array.
The number of instances in column i, corre-
sponding to X = xi, is denoted by ci, and the
number of instances in row j, corresponding
to Y = yj, is denoted by rj.
}
}
ci
rj
yj
xi
nij
given by the fraction of the total number of points that fall in column i, so that
p(X = xi) = ci
N .
(2.2)
Since P
i ci = N, we see that
L
X
i=1
p(X = xi) = 1
(2.3)
and, hence, the probabilities sum to one as required. Because the number of instances
in column i in Figure 2.4 is just the sum of the number of instances in each cell of
that column, we have ci = P
j nij and therefore, from (2.1) and (2.2), we have
p(X = xi) =
M
X
j=1
p(X = xi, Y = yj),
(2.4)
which is the sum rule of probability. Note that p(X = xi) is sometimes called the
marginal probability and is obtained by marginalizing, or summing out, the other
variables (in this case Y ).
If we consider only those instances for which X = xi, then the fraction of
such instances for which Y = yj is written p(Y = yj|X = xi) and is called the
conditional probability of Y = yj given X = xi. It is obtained by ﬁnding the
fraction of those points in column i that fall in cell i,j and, hence, is given by
p(Y = yj|X = xi) = nij
ci
.
(2.5)
Summing both sides over j and using P
j nij = ci, we obtain
M
X
j=1
p(Y = yj|X = xi) = 1
(2.6)

--- Page 48 ---
28
2. PROBABILITIES
showing that the conditional probabilities are correctly normalized.
From (2.1),
(2.2), and (2.5), we can then derive the following relationship:
p(X = xi, Y = yj) = nij
N = nij
ci
· ci
N
= p(Y = yj|X = xi)p(X = xi),
(2.7)
which is the product rule of probability.
So far, we have been quite careful to make a distinction between a random vari-
able, such as X, and the values that the random variable can take, for example xi.
Thus, the probability that X takes the value xi is denoted p(X = xi). Although
this helps to avoid ambiguity, it leads to a rather cumbersome notation, and in many
cases there will be no need for such pedantry. Instead, we may simply write p(X) to
denote a distribution over the random variable X, or p(xi) to denote the distribution
evaluated for the particular value xi, provided that the interpretation is clear from the
context.
With this more compact notation, we can write the two fundamental rules of
probability theory in the following form:
sum rule
p(X) =
X
Y
p(X, Y )
(2.8)
product rule
p(X, Y ) = p(Y |X)p(X).
(2.9)
Here p(X, Y ) is a joint probability and is verbalized as ‘the probability of X and
Y ’. Similarly, the quantity p(Y |X) is a conditional probability and is verbalized as
‘the probability of Y given X’. Finally, the quantity p(X) is a marginal probability
and is simply ‘the probability of X’. These two simple rules form the basis for all of
the probabilistic machinery that we will use throughout this book.
2.1.3
Bayes’ theorem
From the product rule, together with the symmetry property p(X, Y ) = p(Y, X),
we immediately obtain the following relationship between conditional probabilities:
p(Y |X) = p(X|Y )p(Y )
p(X)
,
(2.10)
which is called Bayes’ theorem and which plays an important role in machine learn-
ing. Note how Bayes’ theorem relates the conditional distribution p(Y |X) on the
left-hand side of the equation, to the ‘reversed’ conditional distribution p(X|Y ) on
the right-hand side. Using the sum rule, the denominator in Bayes’ theorem can be
expressed in terms of the quantities appearing in the numerator:
p(X) =
X
Y
p(X|Y )p(Y ).
(2.11)
Thus, we can view the denominator in Bayes’ theorem as being the normalization
constant required to ensure that the sum over the conditional probability distribution
on the left-hand side of (2.10) over all values of Y equals one.

--- Page 49 ---
2.1. The Rules of Probability
29
p(X,Y )
X
Y = 2
Y = 1
p(Y )
p(X)
X
X
p(X|Y = 1)
Figure 2.5
An illustration of a distribution over two variables, X, which takes nine possible values, and Y ,
which takes two possible values. The top left ﬁgure shows a sample of 60 points drawn from a joint probability
distribution over these variables. The remaining ﬁgures show histogram estimates of the marginal distributions
p(X) and p(Y ), as well as the conditional distribution p(X|Y = 1) corresponding to the bottom row in the top left
ﬁgure.
In Figure 2.5, we show a simple example involving a joint distribution over two
variables to illustrate the concept of marginal and conditional distributions. Here a
ﬁnite sample of N = 60 data points has been drawn from the joint distribution and
is shown in the top left. In the top right is a histogram of the fractions of data points
having each of the two values of Y . From the deﬁnition of probability, these frac-
tions would equal the corresponding probabilities p(Y ) in the limit when the sample
size N →∞. We can view the histogram as a simple way to model a probability
distribution given only a ﬁnite number of points drawn from that distribution. The
Section 3.5.1
remaining two plots in Figure 2.5 show the corresponding histogram estimates of
p(X) and p(X|Y = 1).

--- Page 50 ---
30
2. PROBABILITIES
2.1.4
Medical screening revisited
Let us now return to our cancer screening example and apply the sum and prod-
uct rules of probability to answer our two questions. For clarity, when working
through this example, we will once again be explicit about distinguishing between
the random variables and their instantiations. We will denote the presence or absence
of cancer by the variable C, which can take two values: C = 0 corresponds to ‘no
cancer’ and C = 1 corresponds to ‘cancer’. We have assumed that one person in a
hundred in the population has cancer, and so we have
p(C = 1)
=
1/100
(2.12)
p(C = 0)
=
99/100,
(2.13)
respectively. Note that these satisfy p(C = 0) + p(C = 1) = 1.
Now let us introduce a second random variable T representing the outcome of a
screening test, where T = 1 denotes a positive result, indicative of cancer, and T = 0
a negative result, indicative of the absence of cancer. As illustrated in Figure 2.3, we
know that for those who have cancer the probability of a positive test result is 90%,
while for those who do not have cancer the probability of a positive test result is 3%.
We can therefore write out all four conditional probabilities:
p(T = 1|C = 1)
=
90/100
(2.14)
p(T = 0|C = 1)
=
10/100
(2.15)
p(T = 1|C = 0)
=
3/100
(2.16)
p(T = 0|C = 0)
=
97/100.
(2.17)
Again, note that these probabilities are normalized so that
p(T = 1|C = 1) + p(T = 0|C = 1) = 1
(2.18)
and similarly
p(T = 1|C = 0) + p(T = 0|C = 0) = 1.
(2.19)
We can now use the sum and product rules of probability to answer our ﬁrst
question and evaluate the overall probability that someone who is tested at random
will have a positive test result:
p(T = 1)
=
p(T = 1|C = 0)p(C = 0) + p(T = 1|C = 1)p(C = 1)
=
3
100 × 99
100 + 90
100 ×
1
100 =
387
10, 000 = 0.0387.
(2.20)
We see that if a person is tested at random there is a roughly 4% chance that the
test will be positive even though there is a 1% chance that they actually have cancer.
From this it follows, using the sum rule, that p(T = 0) = 1 −387/10, 000 =
9613/10, 000 = 0.9613 and, hence, there is a roughly 96% chance that the do not
have cancer.
Now consider our second question, which is the one that is of particular interest
to a person being screened: if a test is positive, what is the probability that the person

--- Page 51 ---
2.1. The Rules of Probability
31
has cancer? This requires that we evaluate the probability of cancer conditional
on the outcome of the test, whereas the probabilities in (2.14) to (2.17) give the
probability distribution over the test outcome conditioned on whether the person has
cancer. We can solve the problem of reversing the conditional probability by using
Bayes’ theorem (2.10) to give
p(C = 1|T = 1)
=
p(T = 1|C = 1)p(C = 1)
p(T = 1)
(2.21)
=
90
100 ×
1
100 × 10, 000
387
= 90
387 ≃0.23
(2.22)
so that if a person is tested at random and the test is positive, there is a 23% proba-
bility that they actually have cancer. From the sum rule, it then follows that p(C =
0|T = 1) = 1 −90/387 = 297/387 ≃0.77, which is a 77% chance that they do not
have cancer.
2.1.5
Prior and posterior probabilities
We can use the cancer screening example to provide an important interpretation
of Bayes’ theorem as follows. If we had been asked whether someone is likely to
have cancer, before they have received a test, then the most complete information we
have available is provided by the probability p(C). We call this the prior probability
because it is the probability available before we observe the result of the test. Once
we are told that this person has received a positive test, we can then use Bayes’ theo-
rem to compute the probability p(C|T), which we will call the posterior probability
because it is the probability obtained after we have observed the test result T.
In this example, the prior probability of having cancer is 1%. However, once we
have observed that the test result is positive, we ﬁnd that the posterior probability of
cancer is now 23%, which is a substantially higher probability of cancer, as we would
intuitively expect. We note, however, that a person with a positive test still has only a
23% change of actually having cancer, even though the test appears, from Figure 2.3
to be reasonably ‘accurate’. This conclusion seems counter-intuitive to many people.
Exercise 2.1
The reason has to do with the low prior probability of having cancer. Although
the test provides strong evidence of cancer, this has to be combined with the prior
probability using Bayes’ theorem to arrive at the correct posterior probability.
2.1.6
Independent variables
Finally, if the joint distribution of two variables factorizes into the product of the
marginals, so that p(X, Y ) = p(X)p(Y ), then X and Y are said to be independent.
An example of independent events would be the successive ﬂips of a coin. From
the product rule, we see that p(Y |X) = p(Y ), and so the conditional distribution
of Y given X is indeed independent of the value of X. In our cancer screening
example, if the probability of a positive test is independent of whether the person has
cancer, then p(T|C) = p(T), which means that from Bayes’ theorem (2.10) we have
p(C|T) = p(C), and therefore probability of cancer is not changed by observing the
test outcome. Of course, such a test would be useless because the outcome of the
test tells us nothing about whether the person has cancer.

--- Page 52 ---
32
2. PROBABILITIES
Figure 2.6
The concept of probability for
discrete variables can be ex-
tended to that of a probabil-
ity density p(x) over a contin-
uous variable x and is such
that the probability of x lying
in the interval (x, x + δx) is
given by p(x)δx for δx →0.
The probability density can
be expressed as the deriva-
tive of a cumulative distribu-
tion function P(x).
x
δx
p(x)
P(x)
2.2. Probability Densities
As well as considering probabilities deﬁned over discrete sets of values, we also
wish to consider probabilities with respect to continuous variables. For instance, we
might wish to predict what dose of drug to give to a patient. Since there will be
uncertainty in this prediction, we want to quantify this uncertainty and again we can
make use of probabilities. However, we cannot simply apply the concepts of proba-
bility discussed so far directly, since the probability of observing a speciﬁc value for
a continuous variable, to inﬁnite precision, will effectively be zero. Instead, we need
to introduce the concept of a probability density. Here we will limit ourselves to a
relatively informal discussion.
We deﬁne the probability density p(x) over a continuous variable x to be such
that the probability of x falling in the interval (x, x + δx) is given by p(x)δx for
δx →0. This is illustrated in Figure 2.6. The probability that x will lie in an interval
(a, b) is then given by
p(x ∈(a, b)) =
Z b
a
p(x) dx.
(2.23)
Because probabilities are non-negative, and because the value of x must lie some-
where on the real axis, the probability density p(x) must satisfy the two conditions
p(x) ⩾0
(2.24)
Z ∞
−∞
p(x) dx = 1.
(2.25)
The probability that x lies in the interval (−∞, z) is given by the cumulative
distribution function deﬁned by
P(z) =
Z z
−∞
p(x) dx,
(2.26)

--- Page 53 ---
2.2. Probability Densities
33
which satisﬁes P ′(x) = p(x), as shown in Figure 2.6.
If we have several continuous variables x1, . . . , xD, denoted collectively by the
vector x, then we can deﬁne a joint probability density p(x) = p(x1, . . . , xD) such
that the probability of x falling in an inﬁnitesimal volume δx containing the point x
is given by p(x)δx. This multivariate probability density must satisfy
p(x)
⩾
0
(2.27)
Z
p(x) dx
=
1
(2.28)
in which the integral is taken over the whole of x space. More generally, we can also
consider joint probability distributions over a combination of discrete and continuous
variables.
The sum and product rules of probability, as well as Bayes’ theorem, also apply
to probability densities as well as to combinations of discrete and continuous vari-
ables. If x and y are two real variables, then the sum and product rules take the
form
sum rule
p(x) =
Z
p(x, y) dy
(2.29)
product rule
p(x, y) = p(y|x)p(x).
(2.30)
Similarly, Bayes’ theorem can be written in the form
p(y|x) = p(x|y)p(y)
p(x)
(2.31)
where the denominator is given by
p(x) =
Z
p(x|y)p(y) dy.
(2.32)
A formal justiﬁcation of the sum and product rules for continuous variables re-
quires a branch of mathematics called measure theory (Feller, 1966) and lies outside
the scope of this book. Its validity can be seen informally, however, by dividing each
real variable into intervals of width ∆and considering the discrete probability dis-
tribution over these intervals. Taking the limit ∆→0 then turns sums into integrals
and gives the desired result.
2.2.1
Example distributions
There are many forms of probability density that are in widespread use and
that are important both in their own right and as building blocks for more complex
probabilistic models. The simplest form would be one in which p(x) is a constant,
independent of x, but this cannot be normalized because the integral in (2.28) will
be divergent. Distributions that cannot be normalized are called improper. We can,
however, have the uniform distribution that is constant over a ﬁnite region, say (c, d),
and zero elsewhere, in which case (2.28) implies
p(x) = 1/(d −c),
x ∈(c, d).
(2.33)

--- Page 54 ---
34
2. PROBABILITIES
Figure 2.7
Plots of a uniform distribution over
the range (−1, 1), shown in red,
the exponential distribution with
λ
=
1, shown in blue, and a
Laplace distribution with µ = 1
and γ = 1, shown in green.
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
x
0.0
0.5
1.0
p(x)
Another simple form of density is the exponential distribution given by
p(x|λ) = λ exp(−λx),
x ⩾0.
(2.34)
A variant of the exponential distribution, known as the Laplace distribution, allows
the peak to be moved to a location µ and is given by
p(x|µ, γ) = 1
2γ exp

−|x −µ|
γ

.
(2.35)
The constant, exponential, and Laplace distributions are illustrated in Figure 2.7.
Another important distribution is the Dirac delta function, which is written
p(x|µ) = δ(x −µ).
(2.36)
This is deﬁned to be zero everywhere except at x = µ and to have the property of in-
tegrating to unity according to (2.28). Informally, we can think of this as an inﬁnitely
narrow and inﬁnitely tall spike located at x = µ with the property of having unit area.
Finally, if we have a ﬁnite set of observations of x given by D = {x1, . . . , xN} then
we can use the delta function to construct the empirical distribution given by
p(x|D) = 1
N
N
X
n=1
δ(x −xn),
(2.37)
which consists of a Dirac delta function centred on each of the data points. The
probability density deﬁned by (2.37) integrates to one as required.
Exercise 2.6
2.2.2
Expectations and covariances
One of the most important operations involving probabilities is that of ﬁnding
weighted averages of functions. The weighted average of some function f(x) under
a probability distribution p(x) is called the expectation of f(x) and will be denoted
by E[f]. For a discrete distribution, it is given by summing over all possible values
of x in the form
E[f] =
X
x
p(x)f(x)
(2.38)

--- Page 55 ---
2.2. Probability Densities
35
where the average is weighted by the relative probabilities of the different values of
x. For continuous variables, expectations are expressed in terms of an integration
with respect to the corresponding probability density:
E[f] =
Z
p(x)f(x) dx.
(2.39)
In either case, if we are given a ﬁnite number N of points drawn from the probability
distribution or probability density, then the expectation can be approximated as a
ﬁnite sum over these points:
Exercise 2.7
E[f] ≃1
N
N
X
n=1
f(xn).
(2.40)
The approximation in (2.40) becomes exact in the limit N →∞.
Sometimes we will be considering expectations of functions of several variables,
in which case we can use a subscript to indicate which variable is being averaged
over, so that for instance
Ex[f(x, y)]
(2.41)
denotes the average of the function f(x, y) with respect to the distribution of x. Note
that Ex[f(x, y)] will be a function of y.
We can also consider a conditional expectation with respect to a conditional
distribution, so that
Ex[f|y] =
X
x
p(x|y)f(x),
(2.42)
which is also a function of y. For continuous variables, the conditional expectation
takes the form
Ex[f|y] =
Z
p(x|y)f(x) dx.
(2.43)
The variance of f(x) is deﬁned by
var[f] = E
h
(f(x) −E[f(x)])2i
(2.44)
and provides a measure of how much f(x) varies around its mean value E[f(x)].
Expanding out the square, we see that the variance can also be written in terms of
the expectations of f(x) and f(x)2:
Exercise 2.8
var[f] = E[f(x)2] −E[f(x)]2.
(2.45)
In particular, we can consider the variance of the variable x itself, which is given by
var[x] = E[x2] −E[x]2.
(2.46)
For two random variables x and y, the covariance measures the extent to which
the two variables vary together and is deﬁned by
cov[x, y]
=
Ex,y [{x −E[x]} {y −E[y]}]
=
Ex,y[xy] −E[x]E[y].
(2.47)

--- Page 56 ---
36
2. PROBABILITIES
Figure 2.8
Plot of a Gaussian distribu-
tion for a single continuous
variable x showing the mean
µ and the standard deviation
σ.
N(x|µ, σ2)
x
2σ
µ
If x and y are independent, then their covariance equals zero.
Exercise 2.9
For two vectors x and y, their covariance is a matrix given by
cov[x, y]
=
Ex,y

{x −E[x]}{yT −E[yT]}

=
Ex,y[xyT] −E[x]E[yT].
(2.48)
If we consider the covariance of the components of a vector x with each other, then
we use a slightly simpler notation cov[x] ≡cov[x, x].
2.3. The Gaussian Distribution
One of the most important probability distributions for continuous variables is called
the normal or Gaussian distribution, and we will make extensive use of this distribu-
tion throughout the rest of the book. For a single real-valued variable x, the Gaussian
distribution is deﬁned by
N
 x|µ, σ2
=
1
(2πσ2)1/2 exp

−1
2σ2 (x −µ)2

,
(2.49)
which represents a probability density over x governed by two parameters: µ, called
the mean, and σ2, called the variance. The square root of the variance, given by
σ, is called the standard deviation, and the reciprocal of the variance, written as
β = 1/σ2, is called the precision. We will see the motivation for this terminology
shortly. Figure 2.8 shows a plot of the Gaussian distribution. Although the form
of the Gaussian distribution might seem arbitrary, we will see later that it arises
naturally from the concept of maximum entropy and from the perspective of the
Section 2.5.4
central limit theorem.
Section 3.2
From (2.49) we see that the Gaussian distribution satisﬁes
N(x|µ, σ2) > 0.
(2.50)

--- Page 57 ---
2.3. The Gaussian Distribution
37
Also, it is straightforward to show that the Gaussian is normalized, so that
Exercise 2.12
Z ∞
−∞
N
 x|µ, σ2
dx = 1.
(2.51)
Thus, (2.49) satisﬁes the two requirements for a valid probability density.
2.3.1
Mean and variance
We can readily ﬁnd expectations of functions of x under the Gaussian distribu-
tion. In particular, the average value of x is given by
Exercise 2.13
E[x] =
Z ∞
−∞
N
 x|µ, σ2
x dx = µ.
(2.52)
Because the parameter µ represents the average value of x under the distribution, it
is referred to as the mean. The integral in (2.52) is known as the ﬁrst-order moment
of the distribution because it is the expectation of x raised to the power one. We can
similarly evaluate the second-order moment given by
E[x2] =
Z ∞
−∞
N
 x|µ, σ2
x2 dx = µ2 + σ2.
(2.53)
From (2.52) and (2.53), it follows that the variance of x is given by
var[x] = E[x2] −E[x]2 = σ2
(2.54)
and hence σ2 is referred to as the variance parameter. The maximum of a distribution
is known as its mode. For a Gaussian, the mode coincides with the mean.
Exercise 2.14
2.3.2
Likelihood function
Suppose that we have a data set of observations represented as a row vector
x = (x1, . . . , xN), representing N observations of the scalar variable x. Note that
we are using the typeface x to distinguish this from a single observation of a D-
dimensional vector-valued variable, which we represent by a column vector x =
(x1, . . . , xD)T. We will suppose that the observations are drawn independently from
a Gaussian distribution whose mean µ and variance σ2 are unknown, and we would
like to determine these parameters from the data set. The problem of estimating a
distribution, given a ﬁnite set of observations, is known as density estimation. It
should be emphasized that the problem of density estimation is fundamentally ill-
posed, because there are inﬁnitely many probability distributions that could have
given rise to the observed ﬁnite data set. Indeed, any distribution p(x) that is non-
zero at each of the data points x1, . . . , xN is a potential candidate. Here we constrain
the space of distributions to be Gaussians, which leads to a well-deﬁned solution.
Data points that are drawn independently from the same distribution are said to
be independent and identically distributed, which is often abbreviated to i.i.d. or
IID. We have seen that the joint probability of two independent events is given by
the product of the marginal probabilities for each event separately. Because our data

--- Page 58 ---
38
2. PROBABILITIES
Figure 2.9
Illustration of the likelihood func-
tion for the Gaussian distribution
shown by the red curve.
Here
the grey points denote a data set
of values {xn}, and the likelihood
function (2.55) is given by the
product of the corresponding val-
ues of p(x) denoted by the blue
points. Maximizing the likelihood
involves adjusting the mean and
variance of the Gaussian so as to
maximize this product.
xn
N
 xn|µ, σ2
x
p(x)
set x is i.i.d., we can therefore write the probability of the data set, given µ and σ2,
in the form
p(x|µ, σ2) =
N
Y
n=1
N
 xn|µ, σ2
.
(2.55)
When viewed as a function of µ and σ2, this is called the likelihood function for the
Gaussian and is interpreted diagrammatically in Figure 2.9.
One common approach for determining the parameters in a probability distribu-
tion using an observed data set, known as maximum likelihood, is to ﬁnd the param-
eter values that maximize the likelihood function. This might appear to be a strange
criterion because, from our foregoing discussion of probability theory, it would seem
more natural to maximize the probability of the parameters given the data, not the
probability of the data given the parameters. In fact, these two criteria are related.
Section 2.6.2
To start with, however, we will determine values for the unknown parameters µ
and σ2 in the Gaussian by maximizing the likelihood function (2.55). In practice,
it is more convenient to maximize the log of the likelihood function. Because the
logarithm is a monotonically increasing function of its argument, maximizing the
log of a function is equivalent to maximizing the function itself. Taking the log not
only simpliﬁes the subsequent mathematical analysis, but it also helps numerically
because the product of a large number of small probabilities can easily underﬂow the
numerical precision of the computer, and this is resolved by computing the sum of
the log probabilities instead. From (2.49) and (2.55), the log likelihood function can
be written in the form
ln p
 x|µ, σ2
= −1
2σ2
N
X
n=1
(xn −µ)2 −N
2 ln σ2 −N
2 ln(2π).
(2.56)
Maximizing (2.56) with respect to µ, we obtain the maximum likelihood solution
given by
Exercise 2.15
µML = 1
N
N
X
n=1
xn,
(2.57)

--- Page 59 ---
2.3. The Gaussian Distribution
39
which is the sample mean, i.e., the mean of the observed values {xn}. Similarly,
maximizing (2.56) with respect to σ2, we obtain the maximum likelihood solution
for the variance in the form
σ2
ML = 1
N
N
X
n=1
(xn −µML)2,
(2.58)
which is the sample variance measured with respect to the sample mean µML. Note
that we are performing a joint maximization of (2.56) with respect to µ and σ2, but
for a Gaussian distribution, the solution for µ decouples from that for σ2 so that we
can ﬁrst evaluate (2.57) and then subsequently use this result to evaluate (2.58).
2.3.3
Bias of maximum likelihood
The technique of maximum likelihood is widely used in deep learning and forms
the foundation for most machine learning algorithms. However, it has some limita-
tions, which we can illustrate using a univariate Gaussian.
We ﬁrst note that the maximum likelihood solutions µML and σ2
ML are functions
of the data set values x1, . . . , xN. Suppose that each of these values has been gen-
erated independently from a Gaussian distribution whose true parameters are µ and
σ2. Now consider the expectations of µML and σ2
ML with respect to these data set
values. It is straightforward to show that
Exercise 2.16
E[µML]
=
µ
(2.59)
E[σ2
ML]
=
N −1
N

σ2.
(2.60)
We see that, when averaged over data sets of a given size, the maximum likelihood
solution for the mean will equal the true mean. However, the maximum likelihood
estimate of the variance will underestimate the true variance by a factor (N −1)/N.
This is an example of a phenomenon called bias in which the estimator of a random
quantity is systematically different from the true value. The intuition behind this
result is given by Figure 2.10.
Note that bias arises because the variance is measured relative to the maximum
likelihood estimate of the mean, which itself is tuned to the data. Suppose instead
we had access to the true mean µ and we used this to determine the variance using
the estimator
bσ2 = 1
N
N
X
n=1
(xn −µ)2.
(2.61)
Then we ﬁnd that
Exercise 2.17
E

bσ2
= σ2,
(2.62)
which is unbiased. Of course, we do not have access to the true mean but only
to the observed data values. From the result (2.60) it follows that for a Gaussian
distribution, the following estimate for the variance parameter is unbiased:
eσ2 =
N
N −1σ2
ML =
1
N −1
N
X
n=1
(xn −µML)2.
(2.63)

--- Page 60 ---
40
2. PROBABILITIES
µ
µ
µ
Figure 2.10
Illustration of how bias arises when using maximum likelihood to determine the mean and variance
of a Gaussian. The red curves show the true Gaussian distribution from which data is generated, and the three
blue curves show the Gaussian distributions obtained by ﬁtting to three data sets, each consisting of two data
points shown in green, using the maximum likelihood results (2.57) and (2.58). Averaged across the three data
sets, the mean is correct, but the variance is systematically underestimated because it is measured relative to
the sample mean and not relative to the true mean.
Correcting for the bias of maximum likelihood in complex models such as neural
networks is not so easy, however.
Note that the bias of the maximum likelihood solution becomes less signiﬁcant
as the number N of data points increases. In the limit N →∞the maximum
likelihood solution for the variance equals the true variance of the distribution that
generated the data. In the case of the Gaussian, for anything other than small N, this
bias will not prove to be a serious problem. However, throughout this book we will
be interested in complex models with many parameters, for which the bias problems
associated with maximum likelihood will be much more severe. In fact, the issue of
bias in maximum likelihood is closely related to the problem of over-ﬁtting.
Section 2.6.3
2.3.4
Linear regression
We have seen how the problem of linear regression can be expressed in terms of
error minimization. Here we return to this example and view it from a probabilistic
Section 1.2
perspective, thereby gaining some insights into error functions and regularization.
The goal in the regression problem is to be able to make predictions for the
target variable t given some new value of the input variable x by using a set of
training data comprising N input values x = (x1, . . . , xN) and their corresponding
target values t = (t1, . . . , tN). We can express our uncertainty over the value of the
target variable using a probability distribution. For this purpose, we will assume that,
given the value of x, the corresponding value of t has a Gaussian distribution with
a mean equal to the value y(x, w) of the polynomial curve given by (1.1), where w
are the polynomial coefﬁcients, and a variance σ2. Thus, we have
p(t|x, w, σ2) = N
 t|y(x, w), σ2
.
(2.64)
This is illustrated schematically in Figure 2.11.
We now use the training data {x, t} to determine the values of the unknown
parameters w and σ2 by maximum likelihood. If the data is assumed to be drawn

--- Page 61 ---
2.3. The Gaussian Distribution
41
Figure 2.11
Schematic illustration of a Gaus-
sian conditional distribution for t
given x,
deﬁned by (2.64),
in
which the mean is given by the
polynomial function y(x, w), and
the variance is given by the pa-
rameter σ2.
t
x
x0
p(t|x0, w, σ2)
y(x, w)
independently from the distribution (2.64), then the likelihood function is given by
p(t|x, w, σ2) =
N
Y
n=1
N
 tn|y(xn, w), σ2
.
(2.65)
As we did for the simple Gaussian distribution earlier, it is convenient to maximize
the logarithm of the likelihood function. Substituting for the Gaussian distribution,
given by (2.49), we obtain the log likelihood function in the form
ln p(t|x, w, σ2) = −1
2σ2
N
X
n=1
{y(xn, w) −tn}2 −N
2 ln σ2 −N
2 ln(2π).
(2.66)
Consider ﬁrst the evaluation of the maximum likelihood solution for the polynomial
coefﬁcients, which will be denoted by wML. These are determined by maximizing
(2.66) with respect to w. For this purpose, we can omit the last two terms on the
right-hand side of (2.66) because they do not depend on w. Also, note that scaling
the log likelihood by a positive constant coefﬁcient does not alter the location of the
maximum with respect to w, and so we can replace the coefﬁcient 1/2σ2 with 1/2.
Finally, instead of maximizing the log likelihood, we can equivalently minimize the
negative log likelihood. We therefore see that maximizing the likelihood is equiva-
lent, so far as determining w is concerned, to minimizing the sum-of-squares error
function deﬁned by
E(w) = 1
2
N
X
n=1
{y(xn, w) −tn}2 .
(2.67)
Thus, the sum-of-squares error function has arisen as a consequence of maximizing
the likelihood under the assumption of a Gaussian noise distribution.

--- Page 62 ---
42
2. PROBABILITIES
We can also use maximum likelihood to determine the variance parameter σ2.
Maximizing (2.66) with respect to σ2 gives
Exercise 2.18
σ2
ML = 1
N
N
X
n=1
{y(xn, wML) −tn}2 .
(2.68)
Note that we can ﬁrst determine the parameter vector wML governing the mean,
and subsequently use this to ﬁnd the variance σ2
ML as was the case for the simple
Gaussian distribution.
Having determined the parameters w and σ2, we can now make predictions for
new values of x. Because we now have a probabilistic model, these are expressed
in terms of the predictive distribution that gives the probability distribution over t,
rather than simply a point estimate, and is obtained by substituting the maximum
likelihood parameters into (2.64) to give
p(t|x, wML, σ2
ML) = N
 t|y(x, wML), σ2
ML

.
(2.69)
2.4. Transformation of Densities
We turn now to a discussion of how a probability density transforms under a nonlin-
ear change of variable. This property will play a crucial role when we discuss a class
of generative models called normalizing ﬂows. It also highlights that a probability
Chapter 18
density has a different behaviour than a simple function under such transformations.
Consider a single variable x and suppose we make a change of variables x =
g(y), then a function f(x) becomes a new function ef(y) deﬁned by
ef(y) = f(g(y)).
(2.70)
Now consider a probability density px(x), and again change variables using x =
g(y), giving rise to a density py(y) with respect to the new variable y, where the
sufﬁxes denote that px(x) and py(y) are different densities. Observations falling in
the range (x, x + δx) will, for small values of δx, be transformed into the range
(y, y + δy), where x = g(y), and px(x)δx ≃py(y)δy. Hence, if we take the limit
δx →0, we obtain
py(y)
=
px(x)

dx
dy

=
px(g(y))

dg
dy
 .
(2.71)
Here the modulus |·| arises because the derivative dy/ dx could be negative, whereas
the density is scaled by the ratio of lengths, which is always positive.

--- Page 63 ---
2.4. Transformation of Densities
43
This procedure for transforming densities can be very powerful. Any density
p(y) can be obtained from a ﬁxed density q(x) that is everywhere non-zero by mak-
ing a nonlinear change of variable y = f(x) in which f(x) is a monotonic function
so that 0 ⩽f ′(x) < ∞.
Exercise 2.19
One consequence of the transformation property (2.71) is that the concept of the
maximum of a probability density is dependent on the choice of variable. Suppose
f(x) has a mode (i.e., a maximum) at bx so that f ′(bx) = 0. The corresponding mode
of ef(y) will occur for a value by obtained by differentiating both sides of (2.70) with
respect to y:
ef ′(by) = f ′(g(by))g′(by) = 0.
(2.72)
Assuming g′(by)̸ = 0 at the mode, then f ′(g(by)) = 0. However, we know that
f ′(bx) = 0, and so we see that the locations of the mode expressed in terms of each
of the variables x and y are related by bx = g(by), as one would expect. Thus, ﬁnding
a mode with respect to the variable x is equivalent to ﬁrst transforming to the variable
y, then ﬁnding a mode with respect to y, and then transforming back to x.
Now consider the behaviour of a probability density px(x) under the change of
variables x = g(y), where the density with respect to the new variable is py(y) and
is given by (2.71). To deal with the modulus in (2.71) we can write g′(y) = s|g′(y)|
where s ∈{−1, +1}. Then (2.71) can be written as
py(y) = px(g(y))sg′(y)
where we have used 1/s = s. Differentiating both sides with respect to y then gives
p′
y(y) = sp′
x(g(y)){g′(y)}2 + spx(g(y))g′′(y).
(2.73)
Due to the presence of the second term on the right-hand side of (2.73), the rela-
tionship bx = g(by) no longer holds. Thus, the value of x obtained by maximizing
px(x) will not be the value obtained by transforming to py(y) then maximizing with
respect to y and then transforming back to x. This causes modes of densities to be
dependent on the choice of variables. However, for a linear transformation, the sec-
ond term on the right-hand side of (2.73) vanishes, and so in this case the location of
the maximum transforms according to bx = g(by).
This effect can be illustrated with a simple example, as shown in Figure 2.12. We
begin by considering a Gaussian distribution px(x) over x shown by the red curve
in Figure 2.12. Next we draw a sample of N = 50,000 points from this distribution
and plot a histogram of their values, which as expected agrees with the distribution
px(x). Now consider a nonlinear change of variables from x to y given by
x = g(y) = ln(y) −ln(1 −y) + 5.
(2.74)
The inverse of this function is given by
y = g−1(x) =
1
1 + exp(−x + 5),
(2.75)
which is a logistic sigmoid function and is shown in Figure 2.12 by the blue curve.

--- Page 64 ---
44
2. PROBABILITIES
Figure 2.12
Example of the transformation of
the mode of a density under a
nonlinear change of variables, il-
lustrating the different behaviour
compared to a simple function.
0
5
10
0
0.5
1
g−1(x)
px(x)
py(y)
y
x
If we simply transform px(x) as a function of x we obtain the green curve
px(g(y)) shown in Figure 2.12, and we see that the mode of the density px(x) is
transformed via the sigmoid function to the mode of this curve. However, the den-
sity over y transforms instead according to (2.71) and is shown by the magenta curve
on the left side of the diagram. Note that this has its mode shifted relative to the mode
of the green curve.
To conﬁrm this result, we take our sample of 50,000 values of x, evaluate the
corresponding values of y using (2.75), and then plot a histogram of their values. We
see that this histogram matches the magenta curve in Figure 2.12 and not the green
curve.
2.4.1
Multivariate distributions
We can extend the result (2.71) to densities deﬁned over multiple variables. Con-
sider a density p(x) over a D-dimensional variable x = (x1, . . . , xD)T, and suppose
we transform to a new variable y = (y1, . . . , yD)T where x = g(y). Here we will
limit ourselves to the case where x and y have the same dimensionality. The trans-
formed density is then given by the generalization of (2.71) in the form
py(y) = px(x) |det J|
(2.76)
where J is the Jacobian matrix whose elements are given by the partial derivatives
Jij = ∂gi/∂yj, so that
J =


∂g1
∂y1
. . .
∂g1
∂yD
...
...
...
∂gD
∂y1
. . .
∂gD
∂yD


.
(2.77)
Intuitively, we can view the change of variables as expanding some regions of space
and contracting others, with an inﬁnitesimal region ∆x around a point x being trans-
formed to a region ∆y around the point y = g(x). The absolute value of the deter-
minant of the Jacobian represents the ratio of these volumes and is the same factor

--- Page 65 ---
2.4. Transformation of Densities
45
x1
x2
y1
y2
x1
x2
y1
y2
x1
x2
y1
y2
Figure 2.13
Illustration of the effect of a change of variables on a probability distribution in two dimensions.
The left column shows the transforming of the variables whereas the middle and right columns show the corre-
sponding effects on a Gaussian distribution and on samples from that distribution, respectively.
that arises when changing variables within an integral. The formula (2.77) follows
from the fact that the probability mass in region ∆x is the same as the probability
mass in ∆y. Once again, we take the modulus to ensure that the density is non-
negative.
We can illustrate this by applying a change of variables to a Gaussian distribution
in two dimensions, as shown in the top row in Figure 2.13. Here the transformation
from x to y is given by
Exercise 2.20
y1
=
x1 + tanh(5x1)
(2.78)
y2
=
x2 + tanh(5x2) + x3
1
3 .
(2.79)
Also shown on the bottom row are samples from a Gaussian distribution in x-space
along with the corresponding transformed samples in y-space.

--- Page 66 ---
46
2. PROBABILITIES
2.5. Information Theory
Probability theory forms the basis for another important framework called informa-
tion theory, which quantiﬁes the information present in a data set and which plays
an important role in machine learning. Here we give a brief introduction to some of
the key elements of information theory that we will need later in the book, including
the important concept of entropy in its various forms. For a more comprehensive in-
troduction to information theory, with connections to machine learning, see MacKay
(2003).
2.5.1
Entropy
We begin by considering a discrete random variable x and we ask how much
information is received when we observe a speciﬁc value for this variable. The
amount of information can be viewed as the ‘degree of surprise’ on learning the
value of x. If we are told that a highly improbable event has just occurred, we will
have received more information than if we were told that some very likely event has
just occurred, and if we knew that the event was certain to happen, we would receive
no information. Our measure of information content will therefore depend on the
probability distribution p(x), and so we look for a quantity h(x) that is a monotonic
function of the probability p(x) and that expresses the information content. The form
of h(·) can be found by noting that if we have two events x and y that are unrelated,
then the information gained from observing both of them should be the sum of the
information gained from each of them separately, so that h(x, y) = h(x) + h(y).
Two unrelated events are statistically independent and so p(x, y) = p(x)p(y). From
these two relationships, it is easily shown that h(x) must be given by the logarithm
of p(x) and so we have
Exercise 2.21
h(x) = −log2 p(x)
(2.80)
where the negative sign ensures that information is positive or zero. Note that low
probability events x correspond to high information content. The choice of base for
the logarithm is arbitrary, and for the moment we will adopt the convention prevalent
in information theory of using logarithms to the base of 2. In this case, as we will
see shortly, the units of h(x) are bits (‘binary digits’).
Now suppose that a sender wishes to transmit the value of a random variable to
a receiver. The average amount of information that they transmit in the process is
obtained by taking the expectation of (2.80) with respect to the distribution p(x) and
is given by
H[x] = −
X
x
p(x) log2 p(x).
(2.81)
This important quantity is called the entropy of the random variable x. Note that
limϵ→0(ϵ ln ϵ) = 0 and so we will take p(x) ln p(x) = 0 whenever we encounter a
value for x such that p(x) = 0.
So far, we have given a rather heuristic motivation for the deﬁnition of informa-
tion (2.80) and the corresponding entropy (2.81). We now show that these deﬁnitions

--- Page 67 ---
2.5. Information Theory
47
indeed possess useful properties. Consider a random variable x having eight possible
states, each of which is equally likely. To communicate the value of x to a receiver,
we would need to transmit a message of length 3 bits. Notice that the entropy of this
variable is given by
H[x] = −8 × 1
8 log2
1
8 = 3 bits.
Now consider an example (Cover and Thomas, 1991) of a variable having eight
possible states {a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h} for which the respective probabilities are given
by ( 1
2, 1
4, 1
8, 1
16, 1
64, 1
64, 1
64, 1
64). The entropy in this case is given by
H[x] = −1
2 log2
1
2 −1
4 log2
1
4 −1
8 log2
1
8 −1
16 log2
1
16 −4
64 log2
1
64 = 2 bits.
We see that the nonuniform distribution has a smaller entropy than the uniform one,
and we will gain some insight into this shortly when we discuss the interpretation of
entropy in terms of disorder. For the moment, let us consider how we would transmit
the identity of the variable’s state to a receiver. We could do this, as before, using
a 3-bit number. However, we can take advantage of the nonuniform distribution by
using shorter codes for the more probable events, at the expense of longer codes
for the less probable events, in the hope of getting a shorter average code length.
This can be done by representing the states {a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h} using, for instance,
the following set of code strings: 0, 10, 110, 1110, 111100, 111101, 111110, and
111111. The average length of the code that has to be transmitted is then
average code length = 1
2 × 1 + 1
4 × 2 + 1
8 × 3 + 1
16 × 4 + 4 × 1
64 × 6 = 2 bits,
which again is the same as the entropy of the random variable. Note that shorter code
strings cannot be used because it must be possible to disambiguate a concatenation
of such strings into its component parts. For instance, 11001110 decodes uniquely
into the state sequence c, a, d. This relation between entropy and shortest coding
length is a general one. The noiseless coding theorem (Shannon, 1948) states that
the entropy is a lower bound on the number of bits needed to transmit the state of a
random variable.
From now on, we will switch to the use of natural logarithms in deﬁning entropy,
as this will provide a more convenient link with ideas elsewhere in this book. In this
case, the entropy is measured in units of nats (from ‘natural logarithm’) instead of
bits, which differ simply by a factor of ln 2.
2.5.2
Physics perspective
We have introduced the concept of entropy in terms of the average amount of
information needed to specify the state of a random variable. In fact, the concept of
entropy has much earlier origins in physics where it was introduced in the context
of equilibrium thermodynamics and later given a deeper interpretation as a measure
of disorder through developments in statistical mechanics. We can understand this
alternative view of entropy by considering a set of N identical objects that are to be
divided amongst a set of bins, such that there are ni objects in the ith bin. Consider

--- Page 68 ---
48
2. PROBABILITIES
the number of different ways of allocating the objects to the bins. There are N
ways to choose the ﬁrst object, (N −1) ways to choose the second object, and
so on, leading to a total of N! ways to allocate all N objects to the bins, where N!
(pronounced ‘N factorial’) denotes the product N ×(N −1)×· · ·×2×1. However,
we do not wish to distinguish between rearrangements of objects within each bin. In
the ith bin there are ni! ways of reordering the objects, and so the total number of
ways of allocating the N objects to the bins is given by
W =
N!
Q
i ni!,
(2.82)
which is called the multiplicity. The entropy is then deﬁned as the logarithm of the
multiplicity scaled by a constant factor 1/N so that
H = 1
N ln W = 1
N ln N! −1
N
X
i
ln ni!.
(2.83)
We now consider the limit N →∞, in which the fractions ni/N are held ﬁxed, and
apply Stirling’s approximation:
ln N! ≃N ln N −N,
(2.84)
which gives
H = −lim
N→∞
X
i
ni
N

ln
ni
N

= −
X
i
pi ln pi
(2.85)
where we have used P
i ni = N. Here pi = limN→∞(ni/N) is the probability of
an object being assigned to the ith bin. In physics terminology, the speciﬁc allocation
of objects into bins is called a microstate, and the overall distribution of occupation
numbers, expressed through the ratios ni/N, is called a macrostate. The multiplicity
W, which expresses the number of microstates in a given macrostate, is also known
as the weight of the macrostate.
We can interpret the bins as the states xi of a discrete random variable X, where
p(X = xi) = pi. The entropy of the random variable X is then
H[p] = −
X
i
p(xi) ln p(xi).
(2.86)
Distributions p(xi) that are sharply peaked around a few values will have a relatively
low entropy, whereas those that are spread more evenly across many values will have
higher entropy, as illustrated in Figure 2.14.
Because 0 ⩽pi ⩽1, the entropy is non-negative, and it will equal its minimum
value of 0 when one of the pi = 1 and all other pj̸=i = 0. The maximum entropy
conﬁguration can be found by maximizing H using a Lagrange multiplier to enforce
Appendix C
the normalization constraint on the probabilities. Thus, we maximize
eH = −
X
i
p(xi) ln p(xi) + λ
 X
i
p(xi) −1
!
(2.87)

--- Page 69 ---
2.5. Information Theory
49
probabilities
H = 1.77
0
0.25
0.5
probabilities
H = 3.09
0
0.25
0.5
Figure 2.14
Histograms of two probability distributions over 30 bins illustrating the higher value of the entropy
H for the broader distribution. The largest entropy would arise from a uniform distribution which would give
H = −ln(1/30) = 3.40.
from which we ﬁnd that all of the p(xi) are equal and are given by p(xi) = 1/M
where M is the total number of states xi. The corresponding value of the entropy
is then H = ln M. This result can also be derived from Jensen’s inequality (to be
Exercise 2.22
discussed shortly). To verify that the stationary point is indeed a maximum, we can
Exercise 2.23
evaluate the second derivative of the entropy, which gives
∂eH
∂p(xi)∂p(xj) = −Iij
1
pi
(2.88)
where Iij are the elements of the identity matrix. We see that these values are all
negative and, hence, the stationary point is indeed a maximum.
2.5.3
Differential entropy
We can extend the deﬁnition of entropy to include distributions p(x) over con-
tinuous variables x as follows. First divide x into bins of width ∆. Then, assuming
that p(x) is continuous, the mean value theorem (Weisstein, 1999) tells us that, for
each such bin, there must exist a value xi in the range i∆⩽xi ⩽(i+1)∆such that
Z (i+1)∆
i∆
p(x) dx = p(xi)∆.
(2.89)
We can now quantize the continuous variable x by assigning any value x to the value
xi whenever x falls in the ith bin. The probability of observing the value xi is then

--- Page 70 ---
50
2. PROBABILITIES
p(xi)∆. This gives a discrete distribution for which the entropy takes the form
H∆= −
X
i
p(xi)∆ln (p(xi)∆) = −
X
i
p(xi)∆ln p(xi) −ln ∆
(2.90)
where we have used P
i p(xi)∆= 1, which follows from (2.89) and (2.25). We now
omit the second term −ln ∆on the right-hand side of (2.90), since it is independent
of p(x), and then consider the limit ∆→0. The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of
(2.90) will approach the integral of p(x) ln p(x) in this limit so that
lim
∆→0
(
−
X
i
p(xi)∆ln p(xi)
)
= −
Z
p(x) ln p(x) dx
(2.91)
where the quantity on the right-hand side is called the differential entropy. We see
that the discrete and continuous forms of the entropy differ by a quantity ln ∆, which
diverges in the limit ∆→0. This reﬂects that specifying a continuous variable
very precisely requires a large number of bits. For a density deﬁned over multiple
continuous variables, denoted collectively by the vector x, the differential entropy is
given by
H[x] = −
Z
p(x) ln p(x) dx.
(2.92)
2.5.4
Maximum entropy
We saw for discrete distributions that the maximum entropy conﬁguration cor-
responds to a uniform distribution of probabilities across the possible states of the
variable. Let us now consider the corresponding result for a continuous variable. If
this maximum is to be well deﬁned, it will be necessary to constrain the ﬁrst and
second moments of p(x) and to preserve the normalization constraint. We therefore
maximize the differential entropy with the three constraints:
Z ∞
−∞
p(x) dx
=
1
(2.93)
Z ∞
−∞
xp(x) dx
=
µ
(2.94)
Z ∞
−∞
(x −µ)2p(x) dx
=
σ2.
(2.95)
The constrained maximization can be performed using Lagrange multipliers so that
Appendix C
we maximize the following functional with respect to p(x):
−
Z ∞
−∞
p(x) ln p(x) dx + λ1
Z ∞
−∞
p(x) dx −1

+ λ2
Z ∞
−∞
xp(x) dx −µ

+ λ3
Z ∞
−∞
(x −µ)2p(x) dx −σ2

.
(2.96)

--- Page 71 ---
2.5. Information Theory
51
Using the calculus of variations, we set the derivative of this functional to zero giving
Appendix B
p(x) = exp

−1 + λ1 + λ2x + λ3(x −µ)2	
.
(2.97)
The Lagrange multipliers can be found by back-substitution of this result into the
three constraint equations, leading ﬁnally to the result:
Exercise 2.24
p(x) =
1
(2πσ2)1/2 exp

−(x −µ)2
2σ2

,
(2.98)
and so the distribution that maximizes the differential entropy is the Gaussian. Note
that we did not constrain the distribution to be non-negative when we maximized the
entropy. However, because the resulting distribution is indeed non-negative, we see
with hindsight that such a constraint is not necessary.
If we evaluate the differential entropy of the Gaussian, we obtain
Exercise 2.25
H[x] = 1
2

1 + ln(2πσ2)
	
.
(2.99)
Thus, we see again that the entropy increases as the distribution becomes broader,
i.e., as σ2 increases. This result also shows that the differential entropy, unlike the
discrete entropy, can be negative, because H(x) < 0 in (2.99) for σ2 < 1/(2πe).
2.5.5
Kullback–Leibler divergence
So far in this section, we have introduced a number of concepts from informa-
tion theory, including the key notion of entropy. We now start to relate these ideas
to machine learning. Consider some unknown distribution p(x), and suppose that
we have modelled this using an approximating distribution q(x). If we use q(x) to
construct a coding scheme for transmitting values of x to a receiver, then the average
additional amount of information (in nats) required to specify the value of x (assum-
ing we choose an efﬁcient coding scheme) as a result of using q(x) instead of the
true distribution p(x) is given by
KL(p∥q) = −
Z
p(x) ln q(x) dx −

−
Z
p(x) ln p(x) dx

= −
Z
p(x) ln
q(x)
p(x)

dx.
(2.100)
This is known as the relative entropy or Kullback–Leibler divergence, or KL diver-
gence (Kullback and Leibler, 1951), between the distributions p(x) and q(x). Note
that it is not a symmetrical quantity, that is to say KL(p∥q)̸ ≡KL(q∥p).
We now show that the Kullback–Leibler divergence satisﬁes KL(p∥q) ⩾0 with
equality if, and only if, p(x) = q(x). To do this we ﬁrst introduce the concept of
convex functions. A function f(x) is said to be convex if it has the property that
every chord lies on or above the function, as shown in Figure 2.15.
Any value of x in the interval from x = a to x = b can be written in the
form λa + (1 −λ)b where 0 ⩽λ ⩽1. The corresponding point on the chord

--- Page 72 ---
52
2. PROBABILITIES
Figure 2.15
A convex function f(x) is one for which ev-
ery chord (shown in blue) lies on or above
the function (shown in red).
x
a
b
xλ
chord
xλ
f(x)
is given by λf(a) + (1 −λ)f(b), and the corresponding value of the function is
f(λa + (1 −λ)b). Convexity then implies
f(λa + (1 −λ)b) ⩽λf(a) + (1 −λ)f(b).
(2.101)
This is equivalent to the requirement that the second derivative of the function be
everywhere positive. Examples of convex functions are x ln x (for x > 0) and x2. A
Exercise 2.32
function is called strictly convex if the equality is satisﬁed only for λ = 0 and λ = 1.
If a function has the opposite property, namely that every chord lies on or below the
function, it is called concave, with a corresponding deﬁnition for strictly concave. If
a function f(x) is convex, then −f(x) will be concave.
Using the technique of proof by induction, we can show from (2.101) that a
Exercise 2.33
convex function f(x) satisﬁes
f
 M
X
i=1
λixi
!
⩽
M
X
i=1
λif(xi)
(2.102)
where λi ⩾0 and P
i λi = 1, for any set of points {xi}. The result (2.102) is known
as Jensen’s inequality. If we interpret the λi as the probability distribution over a
discrete variable x taking the values {xi}, then (2.102) can be written
f (E[x]) ⩽E[f(x)]
(2.103)
where E[·] denotes the expectation. For continuous variables, Jensen’s inequality
takes the form
f
Z
xp(x) dx

⩽
Z
f(x)p(x) dx.
(2.104)
We can apply Jensen’s inequality in the form (2.104) to the Kullback–Leibler
divergence (2.100) to give
KL(p∥q) = −
Z
p(x) ln
q(x)
p(x)

dx ⩾−ln
Z
q(x) dx = 0
(2.105)

--- Page 73 ---
2.5. Information Theory
53
where we have used −ln x is a convex function, together with the normalization
condition
R
q(x) dx = 1. In fact, −ln x is a strictly convex function, so the equality
will hold if, and only if, q(x) = p(x) for all x. Thus, we can interpret the Kullback–
Leibler divergence as a measure of the dissimilarity of the two distributions p(x) and
q(x).
We see that there is an intimate relationship between data compression and den-
sity estimation (i.e., the problem of modelling an unknown probability distribution)
because the most efﬁcient compression is achieved when we know the true distri-
bution. If we use a distribution that is different from the true one, then we must
necessarily have a less efﬁcient coding, and on average the additional information
that must be transmitted is (at least) equal to the Kullback–Leibler divergence be-
tween the two distributions.
Suppose that data is being generated from an unknown distribution p(x) that we
wish to model. We can try to approximate this distribution using some parametric
distribution q(x|θ), governed by a set of adjustable parameters θ. One way to de-
termine θ is to minimize the Kullback–Leibler divergence between p(x) and q(x|θ)
with respect to θ. We cannot do this directly because we do not know p(x). Suppose,
however, that we have observed a ﬁnite set of training points xn, for n = 1, . . . , N,
drawn from p(x). Then the expectation with respect to p(x) can be approximated by
a ﬁnite sum over these points, using (2.40), so that
KL(p∥q) ≃1
N
N
X
n=1
n
−ln q(xn|θ) + ln p(xn)
o
.
(2.106)
The second term on the right-hand side of (2.106) is independent of θ, and the ﬁrst
term is the negative log likelihood function for θ under the distribution q(x|θ) eval-
uated using the training set. Thus, we see that minimizing this Kullback–Leibler
divergence is equivalent to maximizing the log likelihood function.
Exercise 2.34
2.5.6
Conditional entropy
Now consider the joint distribution between two sets of variables x and y given
by p(x, y) from which we draw pairs of values of x and y. If a value of x is already
known, then the additional information needed to specify the corresponding value of
y is given by −ln p(y|x). Thus the average additional information needed to specify
y can be written as
H[y|x] = −
ZZ
p(y, x) ln p(y|x) dy dx,
(2.107)
which is called the conditional entropy of y given x. It is easily seen, using the
product rule, that the conditional entropy satisﬁes the relation:
Exercise 2.35
H[x, y] = H[y|x] + H[x]
(2.108)
where H[x, y] is the differential entropy of p(x, y) and H[x] is the differential en-
tropy of the marginal distribution p(x). Thus, the information needed to describe x
and y is given by the sum of the information needed to describe x alone plus the
additional information required to specify y given x.

--- Page 74 ---
54
2. PROBABILITIES
2.5.7
Mutual information
When two variables x and y are independent, their joint distribution will factor-
ize into the product of their marginals p(x, y) = p(x)p(y). If the variables are not
independent, we can gain some idea of whether they are ‘close’ to being independent
by considering the Kullback–Leibler divergence between the joint distribution and
the product of the marginals, given by
I[x, y]
≡
KL(p(x, y)∥p(x)p(y))
=
−
ZZ
p(x, y) ln
p(x)p(y)
p(x, y)

dx dy,
(2.109)
which is called the mutual information between the variables x and y. From the
properties of the Kullback–Leibler divergence, we see that I[x, y] ⩾0 with equal-
ity if, and only if, x and y are independent. Using the sum and product rules of
probability, we see that the mutual information is related to the conditional entropy
through
Exercise 2.38
I[x, y] = H[x] −H[x|y] = H[y] −H[y|x].
(2.110)
Thus, the mutual information represents the reduction in the uncertainty about x by
virtue of being told the value of y (or vice versa). From a Bayesian perspective, we
can view p(x) as the prior distribution for x and p(x|y) as the posterior distribution
after we have observed new data y. The mutual information therefore represents the
reduction in uncertainty about x as a consequence of the new observation y.
2.6. Bayesian Probabilities
When we considered the bent coin in Figure 2.2, we introduced the concept of prob-
ability in terms of the frequencies of random, repeatable events, such as the prob-
ability of the coin landing concave side up. We will refer to this as the classical
or frequentist interpretation of probability. We also introduced the more general
Bayesian view, in which probabilities provide a quantiﬁcation of uncertainty. In this
case, our uncertainty is whether the concave side of the coin is heads or tails.
The use of probability to represent uncertainty is not an ad hoc choice but is
inevitable if we are to respect common sense while making rational and coherent
inferences. For example, Cox (1946) showed that if numerical values are used to
represent degrees of belief, then a simple set of axioms encoding common sense
properties of such beliefs leads uniquely to a set of rules for manipulating degrees of
belief that are equivalent to the sum and product rules of probability. It is therefore
natural to refer to these quantities as (Bayesian) probabilities.
For the bent coin we assumed, in the absence of further information, that the
probability of the concave side of the coin being heads is 0.5. Now suppose we
are told the results of ﬂipping the coin a few times. Intuitively, it seems that this
should provide us with some information as to whether the concave side is heads.
For instance, suppose we see many more ﬂips that land tails than land heads. Given

--- Page 75 ---
2.6. Bayesian Probabilities
55
that the coin is more likely to land concave side up, this provides evidence to suggest
that the concave side is more likely to be tails. In fact, this intuition is correct, and
furthermore, we can quantify this using the rules of probability. Bayes’ theorem now
Exercise 2.40
acquires a new signiﬁcance, because it allows us to convert the prior probability for
the concave side being heads into a posterior probability by incorporating the data
provided by the coin ﬂips. Moreover, this process is iterative, meaning the posterior
probability becomes the prior for incorporating data from further coin ﬂips.
One aspect of the Bayesian viewpoint is that the inclusion of prior knowledge
arises naturally. Suppose, for instance, that a fair-looking coin is tossed three times
and lands heads each time. The maximum likelihood estimate of the probability
of landing heads would give 1, implying that all future tosses will land heads! By
Section 3.1.2
contrast, a Bayesian approach with any reasonable prior will lead to a less extreme
conclusion.
2.6.1
Model parameters
The Bayesian perspective provides valuable insights into several aspects of ma-
chine learning, and we can illustrate these using the sine curve regression example.
Section 1.2
Here we denote the training data set by D. We have already seen in the context of
linear regression that the parameters can be chosen using maximum likelihood, in
which w is set to the value that maximizes the likelihood function p(D|w). This
corresponds to choosing the value of w for which the probability of the observed
data set is maximized. In the machine learning literature, the negative log of the
likelihood function is called an error function. Because the negative logarithm is a
monotonically decreasing function, maximizing the likelihood is equivalent to min-
imizing the error. This leads to a speciﬁc choice of parameter values, denoted wML,
which are then used to make predictions for new data.
We have seen that different choices of training data set, for example containing
different numbers of data points, give rise to different solutions for wML. From a
Bayesian perspective, we can also use the machinery of probability theory to describe
this uncertainty in the model parameters. We can capture our assumptions about w,
before observing the data, in the form of a prior probability distribution p(w). The
effect of the observed data D is expressed through the likelihood function p(D|w),
and Bayes’ theorem now takes the form
p(w|D) = p(D|w)p(w)
p(D)
,
(2.111)
which allows us to evaluate the uncertainty in w after we have observed D in the
form of the posterior probability p(w|D).
It is important to emphasize that the quantity p(D|w) is called the likelihood
function when it is viewed as a function of the parameter vector w, and it expresses
how probable the observed data set is for different values of w. Note that the likeli-
hood p(D|w) is not a probability distribution over w, and its integral with respect to
w does not (necessarily) equal one.
Given this deﬁnition of likelihood, we can state Bayes’ theorem in words:
posterior ∝likelihood × prior
(2.112)

--- Page 76 ---
56
2. PROBABILITIES
where all of these quantities are viewed as functions of w. The denominator in
(2.111) is the normalization constant, which ensures that the posterior distribution
on the left-hand side is a valid probability density and integrates to one. Indeed, by
integrating both sides of (2.111) with respect to w, we can express the denominator
in Bayes’ theorem in terms of the prior distribution and the likelihood function:
p(D) =
Z
p(D|w)p(w) dw.
(2.113)
In both the Bayesian and frequentist paradigms, the likelihood function p(D|w)
plays a central role. However, the manner in which it is used is fundamentally dif-
ferent in the two approaches. In a frequentist setting, w is considered to be a ﬁxed
parameter, whose value is determined by some form of ‘estimator’, and error bars on
this estimate are determined (conceptually, at least) by considering the distribution
of possible data sets D. By contrast, from the Bayesian viewpoint there is only a
single data set D (namely the one that is actually observed), and the uncertainty in
the parameters is expressed through a probability distribution over w.
2.6.2
Regularization
We can use this Bayesian perspective to gain insight into the technique of regu-
larization that was used in the sine curve regression example to reduce over-ﬁtting.
Section 1.2.5
Instead of choosing the model parameters by maximizing the likelihood function
with respect to w, we can maximize the posterior probability (2.111). This technique
is called the maximum a posteriori estimate, or simply MAP estimate. Equivalently,
we can minimize the negative log of the posterior probability. Taking negative logs
of both sides of (2.111), we have
−ln p(w|D) = −ln p(D|w) −ln p(w) + ln p(D).
(2.114)
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of (2.114) is the usual log likelihood. The third
term can be omitted since it does not depend on w. The second term takes the form
of a function of w, which is added to the log likelihood, and we can recognize this
as a form of regularization. To make this more explicit, suppose we choose the prior
distribution p(w) to be the product of independent zero-mean Gaussian distributions
for each of the elements of w such that each has the same variance s2 so that
p(w|s) =
M
Y
i=0
N(wi|0, s2) =
M
Y
i=0

1
2πs2
1/2
exp

−w2
i
2s2

.
(2.115)
Substituting into (2.114), we obtain
−ln p(w|D) = −ln p(D|w) + 1
2s2
M
X
i=0
w2
i + const.
(2.116)
If we consider the particular case of the linear regression model whose log likeli-
hood is given by (2.66), then we ﬁnd that maximizing the posterior distribution is
equivalent to minimizing the function
Exercise 2.41

--- Page 77 ---
2.6. Bayesian Probabilities
57
E(w) =
1
2σ2
N
X
n=1
{y(xn, w) −tn}2 + 1
2s2 wTw.
(2.117)
We see that this takes the form of the regularized sum-of-squares error function en-
countered earlier in the form (1.4).
2.6.3
Bayesian machine learning
The Bayesian perspective has allowed us to motivate the use of regularization
and to derive a speciﬁc form for the regularization term. However, the use of Bayes’
theorem alone does not constitute a truly Bayesian treatment of machine learning
since it is still ﬁnding a single solution for w and does not therefore take account
of uncertainty in the value of w. Suppose we have a training data set D and our
goal is to predict some target variable t given a new input value x. We are therefore
interested in the distribution of t given both x and D. From the sum and product
rules of probability, we have
p(t|x, D) =
Z
p(t|x, w)p(w|D) dw.
(2.118)
We see that the prediction is obtained by taking a weighted average p(t|x, w) over all
possible values of w in which the weighting function is given by the posterior prob-
ability distribution p(w|D). The key difference that distinguishes Bayesian methods
is this integration over the space of parameters. By contrast, conventional frequentist
methods use point estimates for parameters obtained by optimizing a loss function
such as a regularized sum-of-squares.
This fully Bayesian treatment of machine learning offers some powerful in-
sights. For example, the problem of over-ﬁtting, encountered earlier in the context
of polynomial regression, is an example of a pathology arising from the use of max-
Section 1.2
imum likelihood, and does not arise when we marginalize over parameters using the
Bayesian approach. Similarly, we may have multiple potential models that we could
use to solve a given problem, such as polynomials of different orders in the regres-
sion example. A maximum likelihood approach simply picks the model that gives
the highest probability of the data, but this favours ever more complex models, lead-
ing to over-ﬁtting. A fully Bayesian treatment involves averaging over all possible
models, with the contribution of each model weighted by its posterior probability.
Section 9.6
Moreover, this probability is typically highest for models of intermediate complexity.
Very simple models (such as polynomials of low order) have low probability as they
are unable to ﬁt the data well, whereas very complex models (such as polynomials
of very high order) also have low probability because the Bayesian integration over
parameters automatically and elegantly penalizes complexity. For a comprehensive
overview of Bayesian methods applied to machine learning, including neural net-
works, see Bishop (2006).
Unfortunately, there is a major drawback with the Bayesian framework, and
this is apparent in (2.118), which involves integrating over the space of parameters.
Modern deep learning models can have millions or billions of parameters and even
simple approximations to such integrals are typically infeasible. In fact, given a

--- Page 78 ---
58
2. PROBABILITIES
limited compute budget and an ample source of training data, it will often be better to
apply maximum likelihood techniques, generally augmented with one or more forms
of regularization, to a large neural network rather than apply a Bayesian treatment to
a much smaller model.
Exercises
2.1
(⋆) In the cancer screening example, we used a prior probability of cancer of p(C =
1) = 0.01. In reality, the prevalence of cancer is generally very much lower. Con-
sider a situation in which p(C = 1) = 0.001, and recompute the probability of
having cancer given a positive test p(C = 1|T = 1). Intuitively, the result can ap-
pear surprising to many people since the test seems to have high accuracy and yet a
positive test still leads to a low probability of having cancer.
2.2
(⋆⋆) Deterministic numbers satisfy the property of transitivity, so that if x > y and
y > z then it follows that x > z. When we go to random numbers, however, this
property need no longer apply. Figure 2.16 shows a set of four cubical dice that have
been arranged in a cyclic order. Show that each of the four dice has a 2/3 probability
of rolling a higher number than the previous die in the cycle. Such dice are known
as non-transitive dice, and the speciﬁc examples shown here are called Efron dice.
Figure 2.16
An example of non-transitive cu-
bical dice,
in which each die
has been ‘ﬂattened’ to reveal the
numbers on each of the faces.
The dice have been arranged in
a cycle, such that each die has a
2/3 probability of rolling a higher
number than the previous die in
the cycle.
2.3
(⋆) Consider a variable y given by the sum of two independent random variables
y = u + v where u ∼pu(u) and v ∼pv(v). Show that the distribution py(y) is
given by
p(y) =
Z
pu(u)pv(y −u) du.
(2.119)
This is known as the convolution of pu(u) and pv(v).
2.4
(⋆⋆) Verify that the uniform distribution (2.33) is correctly normalized, and ﬁnd
expressions for its mean and variance.
2.5
(⋆⋆) Verify that the exponential distribution (2.34) and the Laplace distribution (2.35)
are correctly normalized.

--- Page 79 ---
Exercises
59
2.6
(⋆) Using the properties of the Dirac delta function, show that the empirical density
(2.37) is correctly normalized.
2.7
(⋆) By making use of the empirical density (2.37), show that the expectation given
by (2.39) can be approximated by a sum over a ﬁnite set of samples drawn from the
density in the form (2.40).
2.8
(⋆) Using the deﬁnition (2.44), show that var[f(x)] satisﬁes (2.45).
2.9
(⋆) Show that if two variables x and y are independent, then their covariance is zero.
2.10
(⋆) Suppose that the two variables x and z are statistically independent. Show that
the mean and variance of their sum satisﬁes
E[x + z]
=
E[x] + E[z]
(2.120)
var[x + z]
=
var[x] + var[z].
(2.121)
2.11
(⋆) Consider two variables x and y with joint distribution p(x, y). Prove the follow-
ing two results:
E[x]
=
Ey [Ex[x|y]]
(2.122)
var[x]
=
Ey [varx[x|y]] + vary [Ex[x|y]] .
(2.123)
Here Ex[x|y] denotes the expectation of x under the conditional distribution p(x|y),
with a similar notation for the conditional variance.
2.12
(⋆⋆⋆) In this exercise, we prove the normalization condition (2.51) for the univariate
Gaussian. To do this consider, the integral
I =
Z ∞
−∞
exp

−1
2σ2 x2

dx
(2.124)
which we can evaluate by ﬁrst writing its square in the form
I2 =
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
exp

−1
2σ2 x2 −
1
2σ2 y2

dx dy.
(2.125)
Now make the transformation from Cartesian coordinates (x, y) to polar coordinates
(r, θ) and then substitute u = r2. Show that, by performing the integrals over θ and
u and then taking the square root of both sides, we obtain
I =
 2πσ21/2 .
(2.126)
Finally, use this result to show that the Gaussian distribution N(x|µ, σ2) is normal-
ized.

--- Page 80 ---
60
2. PROBABILITIES
2.13
(⋆⋆) By using a change of variables, verify that the univariate Gaussian distribution
given by (2.49) satisﬁes (2.52). Next, by differentiating both sides of the normaliza-
tion condition
Z ∞
−∞
N
 x|µ, σ2
dx = 1
(2.127)
with respect to σ2, verify that the Gaussian satisﬁes (2.53). Finally, show that (2.54)
holds.
2.14
(⋆) Show that the mode (i.e., the maximum) of the Gaussian distribution (2.49) is
given by µ.
2.15
(⋆) By setting the derivatives of the log likelihood function (2.56) with respect to µ
and σ2 equal to zero, verify the results (2.57) and (2.58).
2.16
(⋆⋆) Using the results (2.52) and (2.53), show that
E[xnxm] = µ2 + Inmσ2
(2.128)
where xn and xm denote data points sampled from a Gaussian distribution with mean
µ and variance σ2 and Inm satisﬁes Inm = 1 if n = m and Inm = 0 otherwise.
Hence prove the results (2.59) and (2.60).
2.17
(⋆⋆) Using the deﬁnition (2.61), prove the result (2.62) which shows that the expec-
tation of the variance estimator for a Gaussian distribution based on the true mean is
given by the true variance σ2.
2.18
(⋆) Show that maximizing (2.66) with respect to σ2 gives the result (2.68).
2.19
(⋆⋆) Use the transformation property (2.71) of a probability density under a change
of variable to show that any density p(y) can be obtained from a ﬁxed density q(x)
that is everywhere non-zero by making a nonlinear change of variable y = f(x) in
which f(x) is a monotonic function so that 0 ⩽f ′(x) < ∞. Write down the differ-
ential equation satisﬁed by f(x) and draw a diagram illustrating the transformation
of the density.
2.20
(⋆) Evaluate the elements of the Jacobian matrix for the transformation deﬁned by
(2.78) and (2.79).
2.21
(⋆) In Section 2.5, we introduced the idea of entropy h(x) as the information gained
on observing the value of a random variable x having distribution p(x). We saw
that, for independent variables x and y for which p(x, y) = p(x)p(y), the entropy
functions are additive, so that h(x, y) = h(x) + h(y). In this exercise, we derive the
relation between h and p in the form of a function h(p). First show that h(p2) =
2h(p) and, hence, by induction that h(pn) = nh(p) where n is a positive integer.
Hence, show that h(pn/m) = (n/m)h(p) where m is also a positive integer. This
implies that h(px) = xh(p) where x is a positive rational number and, hence, by
continuity when it is a positive real number. Finally, show that this implies h(p)
must take the form h(p) ∝ln p.

--- Page 81 ---
Exercises
61
2.22
(⋆) Use a Lagrange multiplier to show that maximization of the entropy (2.86) for a
discrete variable gives a distribution in which all of the probabilities p(xi) are equal
and that the corresponding value of the entropy is then ln M.
2.23
(⋆) Consider an M-state discrete random variable x, and use Jensen’s inequality in
the form (2.102) to show that the entropy of its distribution p(x) satisﬁes H[x] ⩽
ln M.
2.24
(⋆⋆) Use the calculus of variations to show that the stationary point of the functional
(2.96) is given by (2.97). Then use the constraints (2.93), (2.94), and (2.95) to elim-
inate the Lagrange multipliers and, hence, show that the maximum entropy solution
is given by the Gaussian (2.98).
2.25
(⋆) Use the results (2.94) and (2.95) to show that the entropy of the univariate Gaus-
sian (2.98) is given by (2.99).
2.26
(⋆⋆) Suppose that p(x) is some ﬁxed distribution and that we wish to approximate it
using a Gaussian distribution q(x) = N(x|µ, Σ). By writing down the form of the
Kullback–Leibler divergence KL(p∥q) for a Gaussian q(x) and then differentiating,
show that minimization of KL(p∥q) with respect to µ and Σ leads to the result that
µ is given by the expectation of x under p(x) and that Σ is given by the covariance.
2.27
(⋆⋆) Evaluate the Kullback–Leibler divergence (2.100) between the two Gaussians
p(x) = N(x|µ, σ2) and q(x) = N(x|m, s2).
2.28
(⋆⋆) The alpha family of divergences is deﬁned by
Dα(p∥q) =
4
1 −α2

1 −
Z
p(x)(1+α)/2q(x)(1−α)/2 dx

(2.129)
where −∞< α < ∞is a continuous parameter. Show that the Kullback–Leibler
divergence KL(p∥q) corresponds to α →1. This can be done by writing pϵ =
exp(ϵ ln p) = 1 + ϵ ln p + O(ϵ2) and then taking ϵ →0. Similarly, show that
KL(q∥p) corresponds to α →−1.
2.29
(⋆⋆) Consider two variables x and y having joint distribution p(x, y). Show that the
differential entropy of this pair of variables satisﬁes
H[x, y] ⩽H[x] + H[y]
(2.130)
with equality if, and only if, x and y are statistically independent.
2.30
(⋆) Consider a vector x of continuous variables with distribution p(x) and corre-
sponding entropy H[x]. Suppose that we make a non-singular linear transformation
of x to obtain a new variable y = Ax. Show that the corresponding entropy is given
by H[y] = H[x] + ln det A where det A denotes the determinant of A.
2.31
(⋆⋆) Suppose that the conditional entropy H[y|x] between two discrete random vari-
ables x and y is zero. Show that, for all values of x such that p(x) > 0, the variable
y must be a function of x. In other words, for each x there is only one value of y
such that p(y|x)̸ = 0.

--- Page 82 ---
62
2. PROBABILITIES
2.32
(⋆) A strictly convex function is deﬁned as one for which every chord lies above the
function. Show that this is equivalent to the condition that the second derivative of
the function is positive.
2.33
(⋆⋆) Using proof by induction, show that the inequality (2.101) for convex functions
implies the result (2.102).
2.34
(⋆) Show that, up to an additive constant, the Kullback–Leibler divergence (2.100)
between the empirical distribution (2.37) and a model distribution q(x|θ) is equal to
the negative log likelihood function.
2.35
(⋆) Using the deﬁnition (2.107) together with the product rule of probability, prove
the result (2.108).
2.36
(⋆⋆⋆) Consider two binary variables x and y having the joint distribution given by
y
0
1
x
0
1/3
1/3
1
0
1/3
Evaluate the following quantities:
(a) H[x]
(c) H[y|x]
(e) H[x, y]
(b) H[y]
(d) H[x|y]
(f) I[x, y].
Draw a Venn diagram to show the relationship between these various quantities.
2.37
(⋆) By applying Jensen’s inequality (2.102) with f(x) = ln x, show that the arith-
metic mean of a set of real numbers is never less than their geometrical mean.
2.38
(⋆) Using the sum and product rules of probability, show that the mutual information
I(x, y) satisﬁes the relation (2.110).
2.39
(⋆⋆) Suppose that two variables z1 and z2 are independent so that p(z1, z2) =
p(z1)p(z2). Show that the covariance matrix between these variables is diagonal.
This shows that independence is a sufﬁcient condition for two variables to be uncor-
related. Now consider two variables y1 and y2 where y1 is symmetrically distributed
around 0 and y2 = y2
1. Write down the conditional distribution p(y2|y1) and observe
that this is dependent on y1, thus showing that the two variables are not independent.
Now show that the covariance matrix between these two variables is again diagonal.
To do this, use the relation p(y1, y2) = p(y1)p(y2|y1) to show that the off-diagonal
terms are zero. This counterexample shows that zero correlation is not a sufﬁcient
condition for independence.
2.40
(⋆) Consider the bent coin in Figure 2.2. Assume that the prior probability that the
convex side is heads is 0.1. Now suppose the coin is ﬂipped 10 times and we are
told that eight of the ﬂips landed heads up and two of the ﬂips landed tails up. Use
Bayes’ theorem to evaluate the posterior probability that the concave side is heads.
Calculate the probability that the next ﬂip will land heads up.

--- Page 83 ---
Exercises
63
2.41
(⋆) By substituting (2.115) into (2.114) and making use of the result (2.66) for the log
likelihood of the linear regression model, derive the result (2.117) for the regularized
error function.
